should accept yourself just the way you
are what does that say about who I
should become is that just now off the
table because I'm already good enough in
every way so am I done or something get
the hell up get your act together adopt
some responsibility put your life
together develop a vision unfold all
those manifold possibilities that lurk
within be a force for good in the world
and that'll be the adventure of your
life
[Music]
especially for young people they have a
Miss ionic urge that emerges you know in
late adolescence and runs into early
adulthood when they're trying to sort
out their lives and they want a project
and they want a vision that they can be
involved in that does have some larger
scale social significance and this seems
to me to be this could be recognition
it's like well how about we don't have
any
direly poor people and then we see how
that goes if you can improve the seed
stalk so that crops are more pesticide
resistant which you can't or more pest
resistant which you can do then you can
use less pesticide you can increase the
yield per acre so that uses less
Farmland it's like why wouldn't the
greens be absolutely 100 on board with
this as well if they could drop the
zero-sum presupposition and you know the
anti-extra most to feed idea it's like
well we serve women when they're the
most vulnerable and now we serve
children when they're the most
vulnerable and there's no downside to
that there's just upside so that sounds
like a perfectly good adventure and one
of the things that we find doing these
projects is that it's amazing as you
also pointed out that we spend so much
time focusing on some of these other
things like you know plastic in the
oceans and and climate change and many
other things these all worthy things
mind you and a lot of people will argue
that we should do them because they will
help the world's poor the problem is
they'll help them very ineffectively so
for every dollar spent they will only
help them in infinitesimal part whereas
if we spend that Dollar on some of these
projects that we're going to be talking
about you can have an enormous impact
right here right now so again it's not
to say that we shouldn't do all the
other wonderful things I'm simply making
the argument we should probably do this
first
oh
hello everyone watching and listening on
YouTube and Associated platforms and
well on the daily wire plus too I'm here
today I'm pleased to be here today live
so that's also good with Bjorn lomberg
runs Think Tank called Copenhagen
consensus in Denmark and Bjorn has done
the most detailed and reliable analysis
of
spending prioritization I would say that
there are a number of Enterprises that
are underway on the international front
but it's a chaotic mess of jumbled
priority and that's a big problem
because makes everything super expensive
and inefficient which might be a feature
rather than a bug and Bjorn and his team
have spent
well it's more than a decade now damn
near 20 years
determining how to prioritize our
approaches on the national and
international front in relationship to
the multitude of problems that beset us
and it's important to stress multitude
because we have a proclivity in the woke
West to reduce the entire panoply of
problems that confront us or
opportunities depending on how you look
at it to a single climate emergency and
then to reduce that to a single cause
carbon and then to assume that if we
oppose carbon we're now acting as the
appropriate representatives of the
Messiah on the planet and none of that
constitutes acceptable theology let's
say a let alone policy so I'm going to
talk to Bjorn today about what he's been
up to recently but then we're going to
walk through 12 projects that Bjorn and
his team of economists team of it's a
meta team of economists because there's
many team is working what they believe
where we can do the most good for the
least amount of money in the shortest
period of time with the highest return
all of that multi-dimensional
calculation so good to see you Bjorn
likewise thank you being at Stanford for
a couple of weeks what have you been
doing there so I'm I'm a visiting fellow
at the Hoover Institute at Stanford uh
and so I gave the first presentation of
the project that you just described uh
which is basically a project that tries
to say look we'd love to do everything
in the world and everybody sort of
promises everything in the world uh and
we actually have it documented because
the world has has made 169 uh different
targets it's priorities they're called
the sustainable development goals uh
where we promised we're going to fix as
you mentioned climate but we're also
going to you know fix world peace and
we're gonna get rid of corruption we're
gonna make sure that everybody are well
educated and and don't starve and get
out of poverty and and that we get more
parks for handicapped people in urban
areas and we recycle more and the list
just goes on and on and and there's
something almost comical about the total
effect of that because we're we're
promising everything to everyone all the
time but of course we're actually not
delivering on this uh we promised this
from 2016 to 30. so this year we're at
halftime we're at half time of all the
global promises so remember this is
promises that every single nation in the
world has signed up to the U.S Canada
pretty much everyone I think Siri is the
only one that hasn't done this yet so we
promised all this stuff we're not
delivering at all yeah and so what we're
trying to say is look if we can't do it
all what should we do first right what
are the smartest one of the things I
worked on one of the relatively
early documents in this sustainable
development goal world that was the
secretary General's report on
sustainable economic development that
was about 15 years ago and
one of the things I found very peculiar
about it is actually what tilted me over
towards your work eventually was that
there were 200 goals and I thought
that's a lot of goals it's like at some
point you have so many goals that really
what you're saying is we're going to do
everything at once and that's a stupid
plan because this any number any one of
the goals is actually quite difficult to
attain you have to build a structure and
systems that will move towards the goal
and you have to
put the spending in place and you have
to evaluate the outcome it's actually
very difficult you have to build the
local apparatuses and so I ask the
powers that be why the hell there were
200 goals and their answer was well each
of the priorities has a constituency
somewhere spread across countries or in
a given country and we don't want to
offend anyone by
rank ordering our priorities and I
thought well that's all well and good
plus plus the the upside of that from a
political perspective is that you get
all the moral cachet of being concerned
about everything that you would be
concerned about if you were good without
any of the responsibility for actually
doing any of the difficult work and so
you can go to Corp 26 or whatever the
hell it is and posture on the world
stage about your commitment to these
wonderful goals and appeal to 200
different constituents and walk away
while having agreed to spend a
tremendous amount of money stupidly but
shining at least in your own eyes and in
the eyes of the press so then I was
looking around I thought well there must
be someone somewhere sensible enough to
understand that 200 goals is absurd and
the only group that I could really find
that had a method for rank ordering
priorities was your team and so do you
want to explain exactly how you do that
and then we'll and then we'll we can
progress with our discussion but what
you think things should be done yeah so
so you're absolutely right look it's
much easier for politicians to just
promise everything to everyone because
then they just seem like good guys and
they don't actually make any decisions
of course they do in reality because
every year you have a budget and you
don't have infant resources on your
budget so in your budget you actually
show what it is that you really care for
and so it ends up being a few things
that you focus on but often without much
concern about efficiency so what we're
trying to bring to the table is in a
sense and that's what economists can do
we're basically helping and I should
just say I'm a pretend Economist I'm
actually a political scientist but I
work with a lot of really really smart
economists and they look at how much
will it cost
and how much good will it do remember
some things are very desirable but
really really hard to do so you know for
instance getting rid of corruption in
general I'll actually tell you we do
have one good solution but in general
corruption huge problem it cost about a
trillion dollars a year or more uh for
the world but we don't know how to get
rid of it it's really hard to do because
the systems that are needed to get rid
of corruption are exactly the ones that
are corrupt right so it's really hard to
this has been a real problem as the
former Soviet Union countries have tried
to retool because even if you import
Western structures nobody trusts them
because the corruption is so
unbelievably widespread and the problem
with Corruption of course is that once
it's instantiated it manifests itself at
every level of society and so that's a
good example of a low resolution concept
well there's Corruptions like yeah but
now you've said very little by saying
that because the devil in that situation
is definitely in the details and so you
might want to fight corruption but
that's not a plan and so so yeah and so
we should also so you set up teams of
economists that would rank order the
goals and then you averaged across the
teams which I also thought was brilliant
methodologically because you could argue
that any given economist's analysis of
both costs and benefits is has a margin
of error of some substantive amount
right and because it's hard to assess
and to forecast but
technically speaking from us the
perspective of a social scientist I
would say that that's an unbeatable
methodology even though it's still going
to produce a somewhat problematic end
because you it you you zoom in on where
there's multi-dimensional measure
multi-dimensionally measured
consensus and at least in principle
you'd be ironing out the errors of Any
Given team of economists hopefully yes
again what we're not trying to do you
make the truth of the world but we're
just trying to make a much better
resolution of what it is that we can do
so we try to identify what are things
that we can actually do right so their
problem works yeah and that we have good
evidence for works at low cost with high
benefits and so what we're essentially
doing is we provide if you will a menu
for the world so we a menu typically
comes with you know it has tells you
what you're going to get how much you're
going to get you know a tiny pizza or a
big pizza and how much will it cost and
then of course you can make those
decisions so economists they're not
going to tell you you should do this
right but basically we're telling you
here is something that at very low cost
can give you a lot of good food how
about that so on the same way in the
world order we'll make a list of all the
things of all the things you'd like to
do where are really smart or that is
really very effective policies that we
know works that would help a lot of
people at low cost why don't we do that
before we do the stuff that'll cost a
lot but help very few people right right
well we should we should talk a little
bit about that as a fundamental
presupposition too because there's a
kind of utilitarianism there which is
that all things considered in the
absence of other compelling reasons you
should do what you can the most
efficient way well why well because what
efficiency means because people might
say well you know some things are so
important that it's worth spending the
money on it's like yeah but there's many
things that are important and
unfortunately when you spend given that
resources are not precisely infinite
when you spend money in one place that
means you're not spending it in another
place and so though if you believe that
you have 12 things to do that are good
or or 169 things you have to Value
efficiency from the moral perspective
because in principle efficiency is
precisely that which allows you to
address more than you would have
otherwise been able to manage and
otherwise what are you going to make an
argument for inefficiency which is so
it's weird yeah yeah so so this is well
I like this because it it's zero to it
zeroed us in your methodology it also
reduced a landscape of problems that was
so diverse and and disparate that there
was no way anyone sensible could have
possibly undertaken the Enterprise and
then it's extraordinarily practical and
so
and it also this the other thing that I
found very striking was that in
comparison to the amount of money we're
already spending on all sorts of things
the amounts that your teams have been
recommending are really rounding errors
in the in the total let's say
International in in the total world of
international or national governance and
so but then it's also demoralizing in
some sense because you understand that
we could do the 12 most important and
efficient things and do a lot of good
for a lot of people especially the
absolutely poor and we could do that
without really even noticing it yeah
yeah on the spending side so that's
incredibly optimistic but the problem is
is that you gotta ask yourself given
that that's the case what the hell have
we been doing and well that's something
we'll delve in today so we're going to
go through Bjorn's 12 uh uh um suggested
projects and talk about their cost but
also about what they could do for people
and I tell me if you think this is true
so imagine that there's a rule of thumb
ethic that underlies the selection of
these projects we talked a little bit
about efficiency but I think the ethic
is something like well if we could
alleviate material poverty absolute
poverty not relative poverty but to
start with at least absolute poverty
enough for people to eat
make sure they have access to hygienic
facilities make sure they're not uh
inhaling indoor pollution to the point
that they're dying they're not starving
their kids have some opportunity there's
some option for them to expand their
temporal Horizon across decades instead
of being focusing on the necessity for
the next meal because that makes them
um impulsive you might say with regards
to what they're willing to do on the
environmental front and so
at minimum you're trying to raise the
standard of living at the very bottom
end and and you won't do that in a way
that allows you to do that multiple ways
and that's kind of the overall ethical
schema I would say I think I think it's
what comes out of what we try to do so
we're we're basically saying look uh
there's a lot of different things you
can do in the world as we know there's
169 things and you know there's
literally thousands of different
projects out there we've tried to look
at a lot of them and say what do we have
evidence for and what are the costs and
so we've tried to estimate and this is
an impossible task so we we reasonably
assume that we've covered the whole area
of saying where can you get an enormous
amount of good for every dollar or
Shilling or a rupee spent and what we
find is so we're looking at where can
you spend a dollar and at least do 15 of
good this is a a a a a threshold that
we've set which basically means all the
things we're talking about are
incredibly good things imagine if you
could do give a dollar to this one
project and you could do at least
fifteen dollars well we should also
point out that's not an expense then no
no investment well it is an expense and
sensor because if you've spent the
dollar you don't get 59 right back right
you get 15 of social benefits typically
in the poor world uh you also mentioned
that this is mostly for the world's poor
people so we're we're looking at low and
Low Middle income countries uh that's
you know World Bank estimate so it
basically means that you live with less
than say uh 13 per day which is not very
much uh so this is almost this is a
little more than half the world's
population so 4.1 billion people live in
the low and Low Middle income countries
so that's everywhere from Malawi a very
very poor country to India uh to
Bangladesh that's actually a fairly Rich
lower middle income country uh so what
that tells you is this is where the best
investments are because that's where you
can help the most people at very low
cost it'll cost them most in need
absolutely it will cost a lot to make
you a little better off but it cost
actually very very little to make the
world's poorest much better off and so
it also has this moral sense of that is
that is how we should be prioritizing
yeah and so that's the proper payment
for privilege you know I would say is
once you have the economic wherewithal
to be contemplating projects of the sort
that we're describing you also have the
moral requirement to do that in a manner
that's intelligent and also you might
say that would address the problems of
the people in the most want first yes
and and one of the things that we find
uh doing these projects is that it's
amazing as you also pointed out that we
spend so much time focusing on some of
these other things like you know plastic
in the oceans and and climate change and
many other things these all worthy
things mind you and a lot of people will
argue that we should do them because
they will help the world's poor the
problem is they'll help them very
ineffectively so for every dollar spent
they will only help them in
infinitesimal part whereas if we spend
that Dollar on some of these projects
that we're going to be talking about you
can have an enormous impact right here
right now so again it's not to say that
we shouldn't do all the other wonderful
things I'm simply making the argument we
should probably do this first yeah yeah
well and so so just to give you a sense
of proportion just you have to get a
scale of this of the 12 solutions that
we come up with
um they will in total cost uh about uh
I'm giving you a rough estimate here
because there's different ways to
measure it'll need about 35 billion
dollars a year in funding and that
funding could come from you know rich
people like Elon Musk and Bill Gates it
could come from our development agencies
usaid or giz or whatever you know we're
spending 175 billion dollars in
development Aid every year so surely we
could afford 35 billion dollars this is
uh as you mentioned a drop in the bucket
it really is a rounding error if we
spent that amount of money over this
decade we would every year save 4.2
Million Lives this is eight percent of
everyone who dies in the world we could
avoid eight percent of all death in this
world of course we won't do that in
indefinitely because people have to die
but we would postpone that that would be
an incredible Boon for a lot of people
and a lot of societies and at the same
time we would generate economic benefits
worth 1.1 trillion dollars just to give
you a sense of proportion of what that
means that means that we could almost
make sure that that every person in the
poor part of the world so the 4.1
billion people we talked about before
could get about one dollar every day
almost one dollar every day each person
so these projects that cost virtually
nothing could save eight percent of
everyone who dies and get almost all
people in the lower uh in the poor half
of the world one dollar okay so I want
to investigate something a little bit
darker before we start our discussion
about the projects per se so one of the
things that I see emerging on the
chaotic and Confused 169 goals front is
an ethos that is also not precisely
explicit but the sort of lurks beneath
the surface and there are claims that go
along with it it might be that people
are listening think well this is all
obvious obviously we should spend money
in the most efficient way we should
spend the least amount of money we have
to spend we should do it so that it does
the most good but we should also
understand that there are real
resistances to this approach and so one
of the resistances that's implicit and
sometimes explicit is the notion that
well first of all we're playing a
zero-sum game in the world so if some
people are rich other people have to be
poor there's not enough for everybody
and then at which I don't believe to be
true at all and economists generally
don't buy as an argument and then the
next argument would be well let's say we
could make poor people richer but that's
not sustainable because to support
everybody in the world at the Western
standard of living would take five
Earths I've heard that figure bandied
about and there are probably you know
there are way too many people on the
planet in any case there should only be
500 million or a billion or maybe 2
billion if if they lived you know in
poverty and so there's this notion that
the planet is truly finite in some
fundamental sense there's definitely not
enough for everyone and there's no way
that we can Elevate their living
standards of the poor because all that
would mean is that we're going to use up
all the available resources faster and
so what do you know what do you think
about so first of all on the on the
serum some game remember 200 years ago
we have good data for the last 200 years
200 years ago almost every one of us
were poor we're extremely poor so we
lived at less than what used to be
called one dollar a day so we were it
was 95 of people it was 90 95 of all
people this is a terrible world there's
a few people who were you know Kings and
and and uh Dukes and those kinds of
people and then the rest of us were
living in absolute poverty we've pretty
much eradicated most of that now it's
only 10 percent that live less than a
dollar a day I would really to 215 now
uh but you know so fundamentally we can
absolutely have a world that's much
better that's much richer and one that's
obviously much better for these people
now people worried about well
sustainably live on this planet uh but
what you have to remember is this is not
a question of whether we have the
resources to it absolutely we have the
resources when you hear this five Earths
uh uh that's that that is a very very
bad comparison I I get why they made it
uh but it basically assumes that because
of climate changes almost entirely about
climate change because of climate change
which is a real problem uh because we
emit CO2 you have to plant Forest to
soak up that extra uh amount of CO2 and
if we all lived like Americans or
Americans uh then you would need five
Earths what they're really saying is
you'd need five Earths of forest to
plant but that's the most inefficient
way to get rid of CO2 uh uh much smarter
way would be to put up I don't know wind
turbines and solar panels you could also
put up nuclear power plants
we could have very very little uh uh
footprint so actually when you do the
math it turns out that this is this is
just Hokum yes there is a problem so we
we will do well within one Earth uh even
if we were much richer all of us and
even if there were more people so you
know about 10 billion people yes there
is problems with having 10 billion
people but but having 10 billion rich
people also means we can deal with most
of these problems
if if you're poor that's the real uh of
pollution problem right right or you
pollute a lot you both you know you cut
down your Forest to keep you know to
slash burn uh so you can grow some food
for your kids uh you'll have terrible
indoor air pollution you'll typically
have very inefficient production you
will have all kinds of bad things so
what we really need not just morally to
get people out of poverty and to get
them to a good life but also actually
that's the only way we can get people to
be so involved that they will want and
they can afford to care about them right
right well we should also we also have
to watch very carefully the terminology
we use because when we start talking
about making people Rich we need to
really explain what that means hey
Reagan I know you're picky when it comes
to skin care products so tell me what
did you think of genucel skin care
that's exactly right Garrett I'm the
type of person who wants to know exactly
what ingredients I'm using in my
skincare routine which is why I'm loving
genucel their products are made with
antioxidants and formulated by
compounding pharmacist and they're all
about preventative skin care with Summer
coming up around the corner I'll be
using genucel's powerful retinol
alternative which is safe to use on your
skin in the hot summer sun they also
have a dark spot corrector which helps
reduce the appearance of dark marks and
sunspots right now you can get them both
in genucel's most popular package at
genucel.com Jordan you heard it here
first don't miss out on this amazing
deal just in time for warmer days ahead
go to genucel.com Jordan to get 70 off
their most popular package every order
subscription includes a luxury gift box
with two free Springtime Essentials
that's two free gifts plus free shipping
go to genucel.com Jordan genucel.com
Jordan
when when we go back 200 years and
everybody's scrabbling around in the
dirt what that really means is that
people's next meal is uncertain and so
is the sustainability of their shelter
and the opportunities for them and their
kids
are extraordinarily limited so when
we're talking about wealth we're not
talking about you know cocaine and
hookers in Vegas wealth we're talking I
was not talking about Alicia yeah well
people the thing is it brings up this
Specter of the 1920s spouts where
capitalist who's like a complete Liberty
known as time off and you know it's it's
con it's it's hyper consumption wealth
but that's not what we're talking about
at the low end of the world we're
talking about providing people with
enough material security so that they
can adopt a longer-term view so that
they can start to pay attention to what
sort of Planet their children and
grandchildren might inhabit and so that
there are there's both reliable
provision of food and and and and and uh
shelter basic health care hygienic
availability and opportunity for their
children and so it's not exactly wealth
we're after here it's getting people
away from zero absolutely so but but
also I I you know the people who are
watching this but also everyone who's
really worried about uh the we're going
to become these Libertines from the
1920s do they live like that no they
don't they live nice lives where they
actually have uh Heating in the winter
and they have Cooling in the summer they
have enough food they don't have to
worry about stuff their kids go to
school they have a nice life and they
can go places and experience uh the
world everyone obviously would like to
have that same kind of life and so this
is not about you know absurd consumption
or anything but this is about actually
being able to have a good right well
it's also as you pointed out it's also
one of the things that struck me when I
was doing my original research on this
front 15 years ago was the the
overwhelming evidence and Marion tupi's
group has human progress.org has done a
nice job of delineating that that
there's actually a positive relationship
between population growth above a
certain level of standard of living
let's say and more abundance and what
I've come to understand in the
intervening time and this is something
that's very much worth taking apart too
is that
we we have this notion of natural
resource and that's always struck me as
species say because natural means it's
sort of there at hand the only real
natural resource I can think of is is
air
because all you have to do is breathe
and it's there but you still have to
breathe right so there's still some
effort involved okay but when you start
talking about even the next stage which
would be water it's like well it's water
a natural resource well
water is fresh water yeah fresh water is
a technological Miracle fundamentally it
takes a lot of industrial infrastructure
and Innovation to get fresh water to
people and of course oil petroleum is
barely a natural resource at all I mean
we had petroleum forever no one figured
out what the hell to do with it until
what about 1860 something like that and
so now it's a natural resource but
that's only because smart people figured
out how to use it and so there's always
this Dynamic interplay between human
Ingenuity and governance structures and
plenty and one of the things I've really
come to understand is that
abundance depends on
the Integrity of the individual the
moral Integrity of the individual and
the validity of the governance
structures far more than it does on
natural resources there's a zero-sum
presumption in the natural resource
discourse that's just absolutely wrong I
mean uh back in the uh you know 19 uh
early 1900s for instance iron is a big
thing you know we we used to have just
iron if it fell down as a meteorite
right uh now pretty much everything we
know is built with Iron and Steel uh and
and back in 1900 uh Carnegie the rich
guy uh worried immensely about the fact
because it's also important for military
use he worried that we were you know
using up all the good iron and that
there would be nothing left over for
future generations and what were they
going to do how are they going to defend
themselves all that kind of stuff but
what he failed to remember is that when
uh sure we use up the easily accessible
and high quality Iron Ore so we have to
dig deeper and we have to use worse iron
ore but we also have a lot more
technology that makes it a lot easier to
dig and utilize poor iron ore and get it
out cheaper that's what Innovation means
so actually what's happened is that
while we have used up the easily
accessible iron ore we have access to
much much more much cheaper much more
effectively and for all of humankind and
this is true for pretty much all
resources well there was the famous bet
but between Paul Ehrlich and Julian
Simon Ehrlich wrote the population bomb
for everyone who's listening he's still
beating the same damn drum Ehrlich and
his and the club of Rome types back in
the 60s prognosticated that by the year
2000 there'd be Mass starvation and not
only that that the price of Commodities
would spike dramatically as scarcity
inevitable scarcity kick in so Ehrlich
and and the biological types who think
his way think in malthusian terms and
Malthus was a uh an English thinker he
was a pastor if I remember correctly who
posited that
all things being equal natural
populations would expand to the point
where they started to over consume the
available local resources and then
collapse
so that's like the yeast in a Petri dish
model of humanity and there's a couple
of problems with that is that it rarely
works that way in the natural world
because of checks and balances that
emerge in ecosystems but even more
importantly
the idea that we are best modeled as
yeast in a zero-sum Petri dish is let's
call it a bit presumptuous if that
Alfred North Whitehead great thinker
pointed out that the reason that human
beings think is so that we can let our
ideas die instead of us and so what that
means is that what human beings have
done is replace
um biological death
you die when you do the same old stupid
thing too many times so you have to
either die and then new organisms emerge
that do something different or you have
to shift the way you do things which is
kind of a virtual death and that's what
thought and discourse allows is we can
stop doing stupid things and we can
start doing more efficient things and
there doesn't seem to be any real upper
limit to that and I think the evidence
for that is well first of all Ehrlich
had that famous bet with Julian Simon
Simons who is an economist who said all
right you can pick the basket of
commodities
and all bet you this was in the 60s that
by the year 2000 you can pick the
arbitrary date that those Commodities
will be less expensive not more and and
that there won't be you know there won't
be instances of mass starvation except
unless they're politically produced and
of course Simon famously collected in
the year 2000 because what happened even
though Ehrlich picked the basket of
Commodities was that the average price
of the Commodities had gone down like
so substantially the Derek had to admit
that he lost the bet and that hasn't
stopped happening you know I mean I'm
old enough now so that I can remember
when everyone was concerned about
overpopulation and you know at that
point in the 60s we were still human
beings were still trying to get a grip
on the fact that we were sort of now
operating at a planetary level and it
wasn't obvious how much damage we might
do you know there was reason for debate
at least but now we have eight billion
people rather than the four we had in
the year 2000 and the doubt is quite
clear that as population has increased
and governance structures improved
especially since the the Soviet Union
collapsed that all that's happened
fundamentally is we have more brain
power and everyone's far better off than
they were like in all we certainly have
more technology and that's that's
basically what makes it possible for us
to be more people and be better off and
possibly actually leave with less uh
environmentally well right so one of the
things we have to realize is there
there is a real environmental issue but
fundamentally yes but you're only going
to fix them if you stop people from
worrying about where where's my next
meal gonna come from uh are my kids
actually going to be well educated so on
so it's about making sure that we
actually pull people out of poverty give
it put them on a path to prosperity and
then we will also fix a lot of the
environmental problems well that bromide
think globally act locally and that
that's a bromide that in some ways
manifests itself on the motivational
front for environmentalists it's like
well there's some truth in that is what
we're doing
with this conceptual scheme is thinking
globally the global scheme is well how
do we ameliorate absolute poverty well
the the what's so wonderful about that
and this is what struck me when I first
reviewed the literature was that if we
concentrated on ameliorating absolute
poverty instead of making the planet
worse we would make the planet better by
the standards of the radical
environmentalists themselves and I
thought oh that's so cool we could have
our cake and eat it too and so could
everybody else and you think well that's
too good to be true and so then you do
the microanalysis which is what you've
done and you find out well not only
could we do that we should do it and we
could do it so cheaply that no one would
even notice that we were doing it it
would just mean we'd stop spending money
on some of the well possible possibly
not even that we can keep spending it
we're spending stupidity
yeah yeah so let's delve into the
details so so what we've done is
basically look over all of the
sustainable development goals and look
at where here are the really good buys
where can you actually do a lot of good
for little money and so we've come up
with these 12 things so these are 12
different teams of economists who've
looked at each one of these there the
Specialists the best people in their
area to look at how much would this cost
how much good would it do and what would
it mean that they're the best people how
did you identify them and how would you
justify your claim that you have the
right people working on this so I think
so the short answer is if you ask people
in the area are these some of the best
people they're they're not obviously yes
yes they they would all say yeah these
are some of the best people they're not
the only people who could have done this
but they're some of the best people yeah
okay we're doing this we're published
widely in the period uh literature
they're all you know at the famous
universities uh and they are the ones
who set the debate on how to do this
okay so so there'd be a consensus on
their expertise even if they're they'd
be replaceable to some degree oh sure
and and look again our point is not so
I'm gonna you know tell you about these
things and tell you for every dollar we
spend you'll do 48 dollars of good in in
this particular case you'll do this much
good of course it it's not likely to be
48 in real life yeah it might be 50.
right even yeah
we don't care all that much it's going
to be a lot of good but obviously we try
to make the best estimates that we can
and and so for instance so let me just
get started on one of these things uh so
let me take maternal and newborn Health
uh so huge issue area so every year uh
about 300 000 moms die in childbirth
about 2.4 million kids die in their
first 28 days on on this planet uh
that's it now it's come down
dramatically it used to be much much
worse so uh you know maternal death uh
used to be about uh one in uh one of 100
uh women who gave birth would die in
childbirth uh this was even true in in
rich countries you know some 200 years
ago and actually uh uh uh uh rich women
had higher risk because they would go to
a hospital and there they would be
treated by this filthy surgeon by this
doctor who just chopped off a leg
somewhere else and then came in and
helped uh with so and there's
and this was one of the reasons why uh
we caught on to oh wait this might
actually be you know something about
they need to wash their hands that kind
of thing uh that was a Semel wise wasn't
yes
who objected to his germ theory yes yes
uh and and likewise it used to be that
almost a fifth of every child that was
born died within the first 28 days so
now it's now it's yes 20 now is it's
only two percent so a lot of human
misery
incredible amount of uh human misery if
you look back which of course is why the
world is much better place but we can
make it even better so every two minutes
so you know just this little
conversation we've had here one mom has
died and nine children has died in the
first 28 days of their lives yeah why
don't we do something about it turns out
that it's incredibly cheap to do
something about how would you go about
doing that well fundamentally it's about
a very simple thing namely make sure
that more women come into giving
institutional birth now the doctors
actually wash their hands so that's a
good idea and that means especially when
there are problems they will have an
opportunity to get that problem fixed
that means that if you have preeclampsia
or eclampsia that basically means that
you get very high blood pressure if
you're a woman just around your birth uh
you may very well go into seizure you
may actually die and the doctors or the
nurses there will be able to help you so
there's a whole range of things that the
World Health Organization uh recommends
it's called basic uh emergency obstetric
and newborn Care by friends it's called
bee Monk and so we're we're saying we
should have bemuck and we should have
family planning it turns out that those
two things by themselves could save an
enormous amount both of kids and moms so
what does that mean does that mean the
provision of more hospitals or does it
mean the provision of special of units
that specialize in in maternal care so
it would have cost because you need to
have more institutional facilities these
these are not the hospitals that you're
imagining they're very very cheap
institutions right they really basically
buildings with some power and you need
some nurses uh not so many doctors this
is very very low low uh uh uh uh fairly
simple stuff and then you need some very
basic things and I'll just give you one
example that you know the World Health
Organization has a whole list of these
but one thing uh so when newborns come
out uh uh in rich countries uh about 90
sorry about 85 percent of them will
breathe right away which of course is
what they should be doing uh 10 won't so
that's why you need to dunk them in the
back and you know get them going and
then they will actually do something uh
sorry I should just
that's very bad no problem no problem
um so uh then you need to dunk them but
the last five percent
they don't start breathing themselves
you actually need to have a mask over
them and give them so five percent uh
you need to have this little mask you
need to get some hand pump well in in
the poor world in the rich world you
have a a more expensive right that does
this right uh but but the fundamental
point is you actually need to have some
intervention if you have that hand pump
so only about 50 of all hospitals in the
poor world has that it costs 65 it will
save about 25 lives uh you know along
with the cost of the the the uh the uh
the nurse it'll possibly cost about five
dollars to save right a human life but
how many of those kids that don't
breathe well are suffer from anoxia and
then are permanently crippled as well
there is a little risk but it's actually
a very small risk because you go from
being fine to being crippled to die
right and and typically if you don't get
it's a very so you so basically it's a
death yeah it's a sentence more
otherwise you'd have to run and get the
uh the uh the uh the mask but a little
too late so it's mostly just that that
these kids will die but we can for very
little money make sure that doesn't
happen what are the impediments to
having like why that's a very good very
good question and and this is true for
all the 12 things that we're going to be
talking about it's basically because
this is not top priority so if you look
you know and and look I'm going to be a
little facetious but only a little
facetious
you know the people who rule a country
they're typically old men what do they
worry about they worry about cancer they
worry about you know heart disease
that's the kind of thing that they worry
about themselves women are not really uh
you know they're not a high priority
issue of births are not especially for
women uh except especially because
there's too many of them anyways and and
and also uh if you think about it uh I
don't know if you've ever seen that in
the Monty Python uh uh meaning of of
Life uh they have the machine that says
please yeah yeah yeah yeah it's a
wonderful if you haven't seen it you
should definitely uh go see that so it's
you know it's basically doctors like
expensive machines that are exciting and
they can talk about at conferences this
this little hand pump that saves you
know uh 25 lives not exciting we've seen
one before so it's also very difficult
for politicians to take credit for
prevention exactly which is a real it's
a I mean you can be cynical about that
but you know it's good to do good but
it's also good to reward the those who
are seen to be doing good and when you
prevent something it just doesn't happen
and so you can't really take credit for
it right you can't point to it and say
well I suppose with the kids that would
be somewhat easier but generally that's
a problem on the prevention front right
yeah but you can't you can't see it once
once it's happened so you're absolutely
right but just to give you a sense of
proportion so we estimate this will cost
about 4.9 billion dollars a year that's
not nothing but it's a very very small
as we talked about rounding error most
of our a large part of this cost is
actually women's time because we need to
get them into hospitals uh so they it'll
take more of their time so the real
Financial cost is about 2.8 billion
dollars but the benefits are and these
are just mind-blowingly big it means
that we could avoid 161
000 women dying every year 161
000 women dying in childbirth we could
avoid 1.2 million kids dying so that's
all those fragmented families that's all
those kids who lose their mothers that's
like there's it's not just 161 000
deaths I mean there's a Cascade of
terrible problems that emerge from that
so those are young women who are in the
prime of their life mostly speaking a
large number that we're going to have
other kids and so those kids are going
to be left bereft of their mother and of
course then there's the family breakup
that comes along with the fact that the
young woman has died in the tremendous
grief of the parents I mean so that
that's a cataclysm that's going to
involve millions of people not the mere
160 000 and so and that can all be
prevented so so we're basically saying
for one dollar
you could develop and and this of course
is where economists come across as crude
because we actually put a value of
saving a human life this is a very long
conversation about how you do that but
we do that constantly in human societies
we decide whether we put in roundabout
or not a roundabout will save people but
it also costs money and also slows down
traffic so how much do we want to do
that we make those decisions all well
that's always that prioritization yes
and and so we simply uh you know make
that decision explicit and we take all
the costs all the benefits it turns out
for every dollar you spend you will do
87 of social good in the developing
World why aren't we doing this this
would be incredibly cheap to do an
amazing amount of good that's just one
that's just the first so have have
projects that of the sort that you
envision that are precisely targeted to
this problem where have they begun to
manifest themselves already there must
be countries that are walking down this
road already I know we have hospitals in
the west our obviously but I'm wondering
specifically
after your team has highlighted the fact
that this is a possibility and has this
economic benefit are there jurisdictions
that have taken up the challenge I
haven't seen that strongly I mean so
clearly in in most policy areas they
will say oh and we should also do good
for uh you know women that give birth
they also vote so you also want to make
sure that they will vote for you so it's
also one of the things that you talk
about I think what so we're just coming
out with this research right now so
people still haven't heard about it but
I think right I think fundamentally what
we're trying to do is to set the agenda
so that people will actually see oh
these 12 things are really really good
right I want to ask that of my
politician if you're living in a uh in
the poor part of the world I want to ask
that of my development agency I want to
ask that why aren't we doing this to do
this so we're simply uh yeah I I I'm you
know fundamentally I I'm very optimistic
person but I don't expect that we're
just sort of you know going to make the
whole world right what we tend to say is
we're simply putting forth these 12
Amazing Ideas and hopefully by putting
those out we'll at least get I don't
know six of them right right
yes right well and you've got to not be
cynical I mean the the fact is it's not
being a straightforward matter for
people all of us to sort out the panoply
of problems that confront us and 169
goals isn't ten thousand it's you know
it's already restricted to some degree
restricting that further has all sorts
of there's all sorts of political and
conceptual difficulties and then we we
don't it's also useful to understand
that you know on the time scale that you
and I would operate on if it took 15
years to make any of this happen that
would seem like a long time but 15 years
is a drop in the ocean on any reasonable
historical time scale and so it's
possible that these sorts of things
could happen
comparatively quickly by historical
standards even though they look like
they're crawling along to us but this
wouldn't take that long it would you
know it would take a couple of years so
this is really something that's doable
very very quickly uh it would probably
not be doable in one year but it could
be done safely yeah and do you think the
man or woman power necessary to make
this possible like with regards to the
training of nurses and doctors so
there's there's plenty of of nurses
available for this this is not a huge
strain we're talking about much less
than one percent of the nurse Force so
this is absolutely doable uh and again
so the whole point here is this is
something that our development agencies
could do this is something that yeah
Elon Musk or Bill Gates could uh help
fund I'm not saying that you know I I we
should get everybody involved in saying
look let's spend these you know that was
uh 2.8 billion dollars but you know the
total bill of all the 12 is 35 billion
dollars still a very very low amount
compared to pretty much everything else
and do you think you guys have detailed
out so I was just this is just flashing
through my mind as we were talking if
imagine that you had a donor that came
up with the amount of money that that
was necessary to make this a possibility
do you think it would be possible do you
do you know which levers to pull and and
and which which and and strings to pull
to make this actually happen in reality
like has it been detailed out at the
level of play it's almost been done at
that level uh so first of all it's I I'm
not going to get the money yeah we're
not we're not the I'm an academic in
that yeah yeah we've mapped out so this
so in this particular case you would
engage with obviously would start with
some of the big countries India uh
Nigeria those kinds of places that have
lots of of of
women that would benefit from getting
more bee monk that would get benefit for
getting more of of these opportunities
and you would engage with the
governments and say look you could
probably do this at this cost will give
you this much money then you'll build
these facilities you've got this many
women in you'd set up those kinds of
contracts with with you know standards
and you'd see if they could actually
work right now some of these multiple
places and some of these governments
will some somewhat fail yeah so what we
do is we take realistic costs so we're
actually assuming some sort of failure
uh you know reasonable failure but some
governments will just turn out to be
unreliable and then yeah probably not do
that there uh but yes you could do that
and you could do most of this and
obviously I'd love to help but this is
I'm I'm not a guy that goes out and make
sure that we can build hospitals but I
would love to help with there's a lot of
people who know how right right okay so
you talked about uh provision of
respiratory emergency technology what
what other what other services have to
be delivered to pregnant and birthing
mothers and and New England so it's it's
about medication so you can deal with as
I mentioned eclampsia and preeclampsia
it's about a kangaroo care so it's about
getting uh it's a very very simple thing
you just need to know that you need to
do it so you uh you need to uh dry up
the baby and put it on the mother's skin
we know that that actually makes the
baby much less likely to be sick and
possibly also uh uh uh uh that's right
um yeah so it'll just simply Thrive more
uh placenta care there's a lot of other
things and again I'm not a doctors I
read these in my eyes slightly glaze
over but it's a lot of simple things
that that nurses know how to do and it's
a lot of the technological opportunities
so it's very much about you need a
cesarean for instance uh that you can
actually have the expertise available
that's why we need them in the
institution rather than giving a birth
at home so these are very very simple
things very cheap an incredible benefit
okay so that's just the first one okay
so that's number one they're 11 yeah
okay to talk about so uh so let me take
another thing which we we talked about
with nutrition so nutrition obviously is
this number two we're essentially two
and three oh this is two and three so uh
because there are two different ways to
to deal with this uh obviously uh for
people who are actually hungry so
there's a there's a there's about 769
million people who are hungry right
right now which is a lot of people but a
much smaller proportion of people than
there once was absolutely so back in
1928 so almost 100 years ago uh the
League of Nations estimated that at
least two-thirds of humanity was
permanently starving two-thirds
two-thirds more than two-thirds so
that'd be that'd be five billion people
now well yeah so yeah more than yeah
that's probably right so it's it's an S
outstanding number of people now it's 10
that's still yeah way too high and we
want to do something it's a lot better
than 60 cents a lot better yes so we
have come a long way but there's still
much to do so there are two ways to do
this one is and I'm gonna tell you about
that one first this is the long-term
view this is basically about how do we
make agriculture better so agriculture
produce all the food and basically the
the way that you make uh development
happen is that we stop all working on
farms you know remember in in rich
countries one or two percent of all of
us make all the food isn't that amazing
I'm so happy that they're out there
doing that for me because I'm not a
farmer I wouldn't know how to do this I
know we're trying to do everything we
can to stop them at the moment yes but
you know fundamentally the smart thing
is that we have a few percent of people
doing all the farming and then everybody
else does something else productive
that's how we got rich yeah and you know
Malawi it's still about 80 of the
population that are farmers of of the uh
working population so what what do you
think about the objections there's
romantic objections on that front
constantly that you know it would be
better to keep the local land holder on
his farm and that there's something
wrong with both industrialization and
urban and urbanization and the cities
are blight on the landscape I mean what
do you make of the Romantic arguments of
that sort I think it's wonderful that
people are now so rich that they can
decide that they want to go out and live
their life as Farmers again I think
that's wonderful and fine and people are
absolutely welcome to do that but we
also know that most people won't do it
most people actually prefer to just have
other people produce their food for them
right and and so this is the opportunity
of an industrialized society that we
actually have a very efficient Society
where people are so rich they can afford
to go back in time if you will right
that's fine but most of us and they're
only doing that in a false way anyways
in some real sure because the entire
industrial landscape is around them to
sustain them and yes so there's this
wonderful guy who tries to try to do
everything for himself yeah and it turns
out that's really really hard he spent
about a year making a toaster
it's really really hard to do yeah just
simple stuff and and it was terrible I
saw a picture of it was you know you're
like oh my God this is not how we do
things we do things by specializing you
know you do one thing I do one thing you
know we're all better off by being
specialized we'll get to that part of
the solution as well but fundamentally
how do we make agriculture produce more
well there's a lot of things you could
get better irrigation you could get
better more fertilizer you could get
people better educated turns out that
that's very hard and they're they're not
very well functioning so for instance
irrigation uh it's very expensive so
it'll probably deliver a couple of
dollars back on the dollar it's not a
bad idea but they don't work all that
well there's one thing though that works
incredibly well making seeds better
because even if you don't have good uh
access to uh to markets or to irrigation
or you have corruption all that kind of
stuff if the seed comes and it produces
more food when you plant it it sort of
comes out automatically this is what the
green bread first more yeah more drought
resistant or more or more salt resistant
yeah so remember this was the first
Green Revolution back in the 1960s and
70s this is Norman Bullock yeah who
later got a Nobel Prize for they
deserved it it totally deserved it he is
one of the few people in the on the
planet who can put it in a CV he saved a
billion people's lives how amazing is
that to be able to put on your CV uh and
and you know I just think it's so
amazing he basically made you know we
had these long variants that would you
know of Wheat and corn rice that would
grow very long and then have a few seeds
up here what he basically found was if
you make it grow lower it uses less of
its energy on the stock and so there
will be more stuff on the uh I'm not
sure the kernels right so there'll be
more food on them yeah the ratio of
Kernel to stock you can see I'm not a
farmer right so so you know
fundamentally what that did was it made
food much more available this is what
saved India and many other places around
the world but most of this was focused
on Rich World Foods so you know wheat
and uh corn or Maize or and rice we
still need to focus a lot more on all
the other local things that you and I
probably never eat maybe haven't even
heard of you know yams sorcum uh uh
these kinds of yeah so we'd find the the
10 or 15 based food stalks whatever they
are and then aim at something like a 10
Improvement or a 50 and we know we can
do that so yeah I know that so ski are
the the groups the research groups
actually did the first uh Green
Revolution
constantly do this but they do this with
fairly little money and so little money
translates into little efficiency gain
we know that if you spend more money we
have lots of research doing that again
we work with some of the best
researchers in the area who've
documented in the past how much money do
you put through and then how much more
gain do you get in an agricultural
output so how about the argument well if
we fed more miles more efficiently all
that would happen is that we'd have many
more miles to feed in the future I mean
yeah so people will make that argument
but really what happens
and we see this of course this requires
us to see development all kinds of other
areas but uh you know so women need to
get more education they actually decide
I'd rather have an education than a lot
of kids yeah if women have more
opportunity to do businesses they'll do
business rather than have a lot of kids
and we do this in a lot of different
ways if my kids survive more I don't
need to have as many right so what we
really see is we start oh I don't have
to work as hard on the farm I can start
my business on the side eventually I'll
sell my farm and or some people will
start doing the farming and others will
go to the city this is how you get
development yeah well one of the one of
the rules seems to be that as you
increase the degree to which people feel
long-term security and this is
especially true for women you increase
the amount of effort they will put in
per child and you decrease the total
number of children that could in itself
become a problem at some point but but
at least it is a rejoinder to the people
who think well if you to if you put more
you put more agar in the petri dish
you're just going to get the yeast
proliferating faster that isn't what
seems to happen at all and it's also the
case and everyone listening should know
this is that all the reasonable
estimates for human population indicate
that we're going to peek out at
somewhere between 9 billion and 10 and
then God only knows what will happen
after that or even if we last that long
but it's clear at least it's clear to me
and I think it's clear to you that we
can sustain 9 billion people on the
planet indefinitely if we had a clue and
so the notion that we're going to
multiply ourselves up to something like
100 billion and just eat the planet
right to the Bedrock is there's no
evidence whatsoever that that's going to
occur and plenty of evidence to the
contrary yes um yeah so so fundamentally
this absolute just means that we can
stop having kids being really
malnourished that we can stop having as
much hunger in the planet and that we
can start having people being better off
so what this would actually mean and
this is what the model shows is that we
on average would avoid avoid about 133
million people being hungry so this
doesn't fix everything right so that's
about part of that's a problem 20 25 of
the of the people who are starting it's
it's a yeah it's a little less than that
but but obviously that would be coming
down because people get richer uh but
but it's it's about you know uh uh 20 15
20 uh but and this is the main part of
the benefit it will mean that farmers
can produce more food which is great for
Farmers they'll actually get more money
yeah but it also means the price for
each of one of these foods go down right
which matters a lot more but yes or
eventually we'll use less yeah yeah
because per unit oh absolutely and and
what that means is that people who live
in the cities will have to pay less for
their food that means they can buy more
food so they can actually feed their
kids and eventually they can also spend
more money on education all the other
things that matter so if you look at
that whole cost so what we you're
estimating is the cost is about 5.5
billion dollars a year again nothing
primarily to research and this would be
this would totally be for research and
Enterprises so it would be uh for the
ski RN institutions so the yeah that is
what these are the international
organizations have been around since the
first Green Revolution that are
basically consisting a lot of of a plant
uh uh uh uh researchers I'm not quite
sure exactly what the the agronomers
probably uh and and they you know
they're the guys who do all the
different kinds of seed varieties and
you know can they be more uh salt
resistant more drought resistant more
vitamin A in rice all that kind of stuff
yeah and and then we would uh be giving
to National research uh uh organizations
so they're better uh clued into what
specifically does this particularly so
we started making that a priority like
we've made investigation into climate
change and priorities and we say well no
we're going to shift we're going to
shift tomorrow all Spotlight onto food
development and the reason for that is
to ameliorate absolute poverty and
there's nothing in that but benefit
economic and otherwise and so and it's
not expensive and and look we need to do
a lot of Spotlight this is 5.5 billion
dollars a year this is surrounding area
pretty much everything we talked about
so that's 50 cents for everybody on the
planet per year but approximately yeah
so it's it's uh uh uh well it's yeah 75
cents or something like that yeah anyway
so it's very very little money and it
really means that you would get
184 billion dollars in benefits both for
producers for the farmers and for the
consumers for the city it's about 30 30
40 33 33 back on every dollar and you'd
save 133 billion people from from Hunger
real is that not one of our top
priorities well that's a good question
how is it not I mean and I think it's
simply because it's kind of
it it doesn't come across as one of
those heroic things that just say yeah
why not like it should well it's strange
hey because obviously some of it's
ignorance right you have to
zero in on the right priorities and then
you have to do the economic analysis and
not many people have done that and so
some of it is that we just didn't know
and maybe that's God only knows how much
of it that is it might be a lot and it's
also possible that
we also haven't solved the marketing
problem right because you know one of
the things I've learned in the repeated
businesses that I've established and and
this was hard one knowledge was that the
good idea and the product are like five
percent of the problem the the
communication about the good idea and
the product is like 95 of the problem
and part of the reason for that you
might be cynical about that and say well
that's all sales and marketing it's like
no it's communication because
especially if your idea is new and
radical people don't even know it exists
and how the Heller is how the Heller
anybody how the hell are people going to
purchase it if they don't know about it
and so I guess part of what we've been
working on too is well exactly how do
you go about marketing this and how do
you make it an adventure and the
adventure is something like well you
know especially for young people they
have a mess ionic urge that emerges you
know in late adolescence it runs into
early adulthood when they're trying to
sort out their lives they want a project
and they want a vision that they can be
involved in that does have some larger
scale social significance and this seems
to me to be an exciting Vision it's like
well how about we don't have any
direly poor people and then we see how
that goes and and obviously that means
well we need to make sure that babies
don't die when they're born and neither
do their mothers and then once they're
born well how about we provide them with
some food and if we can do that in a way
there's also a way of getting rid of the
resistances it's like well if you can
improve the seed stalk so that crops are
more pesticide resistant which you can't
or or more pest resistant which you can
do then you can use less pesticide you
can increase the yield per acre so that
uses less Farmland it's like why
wouldn't the greens be absolutely 100 on
board with this as well if they could
drop the zero-sum presupposition and you
know the anti-extra most defeat idea
it's like well we serve women when
they're the most vulnerable and now we
serve children when they're the most
vulnerable and there's no downside to
that there's just upside so that sounds
like a perfectly good Adventure me and
and I think that is exactly that's also
what I'm trying to do here on this
podcast that we're actually trying to
get people enthusiastic about it I'm
also writing about this in 35 papers
around the world and yeah I'm writing a
book about this so I'm trying to get
that exact exact excitement it doesn't
mean we shouldn't also focus on other
problems but simply we're saying why
don't we do this first what's the book
best things first best things first so
yeah it's about these 12 Amazing Ideas
that can basically fix uh a lot of
problems that can make the world uh the
life much better for the world's poorest
and it can also fix our problem uh our
Global problems when does that come out
development goals uh so in the next
month and a half okay okay and so it's
the end of February right now so it'll
be like mid mid April mid April
something like that so everybody can
best things first you guys can keep an
eye out for that but you know I'll make
sure that I mention it continually too
so yeah yeah that's another thing for
for nutrition so yeah obviously it's
great to say we're going to make much
better food for you guys in 20 years but
if you're hungry right now it kind of
doesn't help right so we're also looking
at how do you actually get food right
now uh so uh the the sort of tendency is
to say well we should just hand out food
it turns out that that's very prone to
corruption yeah fairly expensive it's
hard to decide on the local farmers yes
that if you hand it out for free it
actually you know generates a lot of
negative uh feedbacks for Farmers so
what we're looking at are the effective
ways so one effective way or uh uh
probably the most effective way is by
realizing that the most important years
when you need food are the first what
they call the first thousand days so the
nine months in the mom and the first two
years uh because that's where your brain
is being developed that's basically
where the tracks for the rest of your
life is being laid right and so right
now almost everyone in the world almost
all uh pregnant moms get folic acid and
iron that's good because that actually
avoids anemia and some birth defects but
we could do much more so what we're
investigating this is the World Health
Organization recommendation but there's
another one that's underway that show
shows that you could actually replace
this pill with another pill that has a
lot more vitamins so basically a vitamin
A and A B1 B2 B6 B12 and you know on and
on so 13 more things what that would do
would it would cost very little it's
already being produced so it's basically
switching out one pill for the other
yeah and it would cost very little but
it would mean that the mom would be less
likely to give birth either with low
birth weight or early birth both of
which have negative consequences down
the line cascading expenses and decrease
in eventual productivity exactly yeah
and and likewise calcium uh those are
big tablets they're more costly but and
and we're not giving to most uh pregnant
moms we should and that would also save
a lot of uh a lot of children uh from uh
from being born with low birth weight it
turns out that if you do this you could
probably do about thirty dollars back in
the dollar for about 300 million dollars
then at the same time we're also
investigating there's a way to give uh
more food to kids at low cost which is
if you tell moms that it's a great idea
to feed your child well uh you'd imagine
that most moms would know this but
actually they lack the the knowledge of
how you feed them well uh we see a lot
of kids that even in well-placed
families that are still not well fed uh
and and so how would you define well-fed
so so it's it's a question of saying
that you have high stunting rates so
that's one way of measuring yeah that
you're not as tall as you should be uh
compared to your age it's one of the
best simplest ways of measuring we know
that if you're stunned it there's a good
chance that you're also going to get
less development and you'll be less
productive in your yeah yeah well if
you're stunted because brain development
is so complex and so energy and resource
expensive compared to the rest of
physiological tissue that if you're
stunted in the broad sense you're also
going to be stunted neurology magically
and so that's and even small decrements
in cognitive ability which is directly
related to neurological Integrity have
walloping effects on long-term
productivity you might think well
productivity isn't everything it's like
well
first of all that's debatable and second
of all okay perhaps it's not Spiritual
Development although it probably is
um but all things considered why
wouldn't you want people to be more
efficient in the use of their labor
rather than less efficient and also
shows the limits of what it means to be
an economist because we're only looking
at the way of saying okay so you become
smarter that means you become more
productive that means you get a higher
income yeah we look at that higher
income but clearly you being smarter is
probably something that also means that
you will have a better life inside the
other way so that's actually clearer the
relationship between well-being and
cognitive power is pretty positive part
well not merely not least because if you
have higher General cognitive ability
you tend just to be more successful at
everything you do and the reason for
that fundamentally is because you can
process more units of information per
unit of time and so obviously that's
obviously that's better because it's
tied in do the very definition of better
yes and and and at least again uh most
of the people that we're debating with
most of the people who are watching this
uh this podcast would would probably not
want to say oh I'd actually think it
would be better if you're less you know
right if you're a little more stunted
yes shorter people have a smaller carbon
footprint yeah yeah anyway so so uh we
estimate this will cost about 1.4
billion dollars in total all these
things we talked about and it'll
generate benefits about 35 billion
dollars a year uh most of it and so when
you're educating women what what are you
telling them exactly so you're you're
basically you're you have a uh uh a
wow a community health worker that comes
out visit the the woman so she has a lot
of people in the same neighborhood
she'll come out visit the woman for half
an hour go through what is it that you
feed your child maybe you should feed it
less of the oh are you giving sugar all
this this early no that's not a good
idea you should do more of this it's
just basic it's very very basic stuff
and then she comes and visits it nine
times and we've estimated what's the
cost of that yeah and you know this is
based on a lot of different studies that
have shown that you actually get less
stunning when you do more of this uh
teaching now the women also have to pay
for the food because they're you're
assuming that they have that extra
capacity so they can but but the food is
still Incorporated and the cost of of
our calculator okay but the beautiful
thing is we're not actually have to pay
for the food uh we only have to pay for
the education of it uh so we don't have
to worry about why so so well because
that's by Design you could have one
where you also hand out yeah but that
becomes much harder and you get more
corruption right but if you just do the
education you get less benefits but you
get much less cost much less cost so I'm
simply saying this is partly a
redistribution of available resources is
only a redistribution that's simply
telling uh uh essentially the moms you
can feed your kid better that will be
great for your kid and the moms will
respond partly by saying okay I'm gonna
you know spend a little less at the
cinema and and give them a little more
food I'm right joking I don't know what
they're right right decide but
fundamentally that means at very low
cost but we are incorporating the cost
that she's now spending on the food for
a for a child but she does it very much
more effectively than we could ever so
you're really looking at
interventions that are as minimal as
possible that produce the fewest
cascading negative consequences and that
leverage we're not looking at the most
the cheapest ones but we're looking at
for the most effective yeah yeah right
yeah so that will often be things that
cost fairly little that have very little
you know corruption potential and and
inefficient potential for instance if
you hand out food uh so I I saw this
when I I visited with the food minister
in in India uh you know uh uh they it's
politically very advantageous to say I'm
going to give out food yeah but
everybody kind of know by now that what
that actually means is you're going to
give someone a lot of money to get buy
some food and hand it out to the poor uh
they're going to take a lot of the money
they're going to use some of it for food
yeah and then they'll buy the worst food
you could possibly get so you end up
with these incredibly almost unedible uh
biscuits uh that unless you're really
really hungry you're just not gonna eat
it right right so so there's a lot of
loss in this whereas of course if you
just tell the woman you should feed your
kid better and you should possibly give
this is what it means yes then you're
more like likely to actually have the
woman make sure she actually buys this
but she buys it cheaply and she you know
she feeds her right and you leave that
decision-making power in her hands too
which is also appropriate if you're
looking at what efficient use of
distributed resources it's not so top
down that way exactly right so those are
the first three so okay yeah of the
first three solutions so let me just uh
move on to the fourth and as you also
realize these are very very desperate uh
desperate desperate it sounds like
desperate to me that's not what it is
right this uh uh things because you know
there are a lot of different ways that
we can make uh better use of resources
so we talked about corruption before uh
in general we don't really know well how
to fix corruption but there is one way
that we found that you can dramatically
reduce corruption so this is in so the
thing that's called e-procurement or
electronic procurement sounds incredibly
boring uh but when you think about it
the biggest spending in most countries
is actually unprocurement so you buy
anything from pens to roads and Roads
obviously being much more expensive
procurement essentially is is
large-scale purchasing purchasing from
governments so in in developing
countries and poor countries of course
half of the world it's about half of the
of the government budget that's spent on
purchasing big stuff yeah and it's
obviously hugely corrupt right uh so uh
one of the ways that you can avoid some
of that corruption is by basically
putting these bids up on what what is
essentially eBay uh you know you make a
a a website for this and we've known
this for a long time for a lot of
different countries uh that if you do
that it becomes harder to uh to be
corrupt there'll still be some
corruption yeah you get less corrupt you
actually get higher quality because more
people hear about it and you get lower
prices and that's of course what really
means that you can get more for your
money in that government so then have
there been places
we worked with Bangladesh who's done it
uh Ukraine has done it and actually
helped Ukraine in a totally different
way when the war broke out because it's
very very quick they could actually
start asking for other resources through
the e-procurement system very very
quickly and obviously they need a lot
more war related so you put out like a
statement of requests and then you
invite you invite permissions invite
local businesses to bid on this so yeah
Bangladesh it used to be that you know
you would put put this request up and
and some official uh publication and
then you'd have to come in with a sealed
envelope in a particular government
office for this for this bid but the
guys in this local area had already you
know they they already decided you're
going to get that yeah yeah yeah and so
what they actually did was nepotism
they actually put up goons outside the
office so you couldn't physically come
in with your bid uh and that's how they
you know got a lot of extra money with
and Eve procurement system that becomes
much much harder right sure you can
still do that but we know and we've done
the testing we know that actually on
average reduces prices by 6.75 percent
and because there's such a lot of money
and because this is very very cheap so
we estimate the total cost so that's a
three percent Improvement in the budgets
overall given so so and you know the
Finance Minister in Bangladesh loved it
because it was just you know basically
free money right uh and and and so uh we
estimate about 30 countries still need
to do this and they could do it for the
cost uh annual cost so there's a lot of
phasing costs but they're very very
cheap you need to educate hundreds of
thousands of uh bureaucrats but again
that's fairly cheap and you need to you
know sustain this all the way through
it'll cost about 72 million dollars so
virtually nothing per year the benefit
is that they will be about 10 billion
dollars right well and you so how do you
calculate the knock-on benefits of
actually effective Distributing money
instead of to criminals to the people
who can actually do the work because you
can imagine there's got to be a
multiplier effect of that too because
you want to set up your Society so that
the financial rewards are delivered to
the people who actually produce real
Goods right and we we had a whole
conversation about that we decided not
to include that so this is an
underestimate if anything okay because
clearly if you have more money you could
actually build more schools or you could
get better hospitals and that would have
it its own knock-on effect but yeah
that's that's an unreasonable extra way
to be this is already so good you don't
need to make it more fantastic right
right yeah it simply delivers an
enormous amount of benefit at very low
cost again this is one of the things we
should be doing so we've covered
um early childhood and birth
intervention we've covered nutrition
we've covered uh corruption reduction
and uh now and and agriculture yes and
agriculture research and reform yes
exactly and now we're going to switch to
topic 5 which is education education yes
so so look we spent the last couple
decades uh getting old kids into schools
uh and that's great because then they
have a chance to learn but unfortunately
many places in the world uh kids learn
almost nothing and so just getting them
into school is not enough you actually
need to learn in there and that's the
next problem the learning crisis as they
call it is basically that a large part
of the world's uh kids uh Primary School
students don't learn anything and so
that means they don't become literate
for example what are some basic measures
the the point is we're very focused on
literacy yeah and it actually turns out
that we're teaching almost everyone to
read a word but they cannot string these
words together and actually make a
sentence so they can't get to the point
of meaning exactly so there's uh you
know we don't we have pizza studies in
rich countries that sort of show
showcase how how much do you learn uh
but in poor countries we don't have that
but there's some parts of it where you
actually ask the same kind of questions
in a lot of different countries and they
show very very bad poor results uh so
let me just give you one sort of reading
experience uh they they have to read
this the following sentence Vijay has a
red hat a blue shirt and yellow socks
what color is the hat right it's red by
the way but but it turns out eighty
percent of all kids in the developing
world at 10 years old can't answer this
no do the sentence is the initial
sentence there with the question or do
they have to read yeah yeah yes there so
they don't know how to refer back
together I'm not sure they actually know
how they so they they know that there's
red in there somewhere but there's also
blue and they also read yellow so
there's no sense of that they didn't
understand the basic comprehension yes
yeah so so we've learned to we've
learned basic literacy but we don't have
actual comprehension yeah yeah and it's
the same thing in math you ask people uh
questions like uh uh two people there
are six pieces of cheese there's two
people how do you divide it equally
between the two people and you know
about about eighty percent you establish
a call me in the state and then each get
zero pieces of cheeks no I don't think
we're that far away okay so so
fundamentally the problem here is that
we're just simply really bad at teaching
these kids so how do you solve this uh
well we know some ways that don't work
it's not about building more schools now
building more schools get more kids into
uh these schools which is nice but they
don't actually learn anything more uh if
you for instance increase the teacher
pay it turns out so Indonesia did this
uh back in 2005 they doubled these
spending on schools and most of that
went to teachers they hired a lot more
teachers to have one of the world's
lowest uh class ratios uh but but
fundamentally they gave teachers a lot
more pay uh and because it was staggered
across the different regions we can
actually do an experiment on this and
see did it have any impact on uh on
learning it turned out it had none there
was Zero impact on increasing the pay of
teaching now it made the teachers much
more happy uh which of course could also
be a political uh uh consideration but
surely the outcome of spending money on
education should be that you get higher
learning and none of that happened it's
a very famous paper it's called double
for nothing uh and and so you know
fundamentally we know how not to do this
also reducing class sizes which a lot of
people talk about yes it does help a
little bit but at very high cost so
here's some really really effective ways
that you could do this instead so
there's two different ways one is
that you focus on making the teacher
better the second one is you focus on
making the kid better at learning the
first one how do you make the teacher
better remember a lot of these teachers
are not very well educated they're you
know they're possibly not very uh
enthusiastic either they don't quite
know how to do this if you give them
better pedagogy so this is a this is
very very well established through a lot
of countries Kenya's uh is is taking
this to all their schools right now
um it's basically about making
semi-scripted uh uh uh uh lesson lessons
lesson plans for each one of the classes
that the teacher is going to go through
so you go for three days before the uh
year starts uh you learn this you sort
of get all the teachers excited they
meet some of the other teachers from
yeah from from the area then you get
them these structured teacher plans you
get them a text message every week this
week you're going to teach this this and
this and you know sort of get them
enthusiastic you have some people come
out so you're teaching the teachers well
they're teaching the kids and you're uh
you have some people come out and and uh
you'll look at them and give them
feedback not in the sense of we're gonna
fire you because you're not very good
but this is how you could do it better
uh they come back a couple of times
during the year uh for some extra uh
learning together with some of the other
teachers this all has costs yeah but
it's very cheap so it turns out this
will cost about nine dollars per child
per year remember the average spend is
about 350 per kid uh you know to schools
and all these other things
that's a very very small uh fraction
this means that you actually can see the
kids learn much much more for every year
they go to school instead of just
learning one year of school uh of one
normal year yeah they almost learned two
years of school you almost doubled the
learning for a three percent Improvement
in increment cost yes this is a great
investment we find that
I had this book I used on my kids when
they were little uh called how to teach
your kid your child to read in 100 easy
lessons and it's it was produced by
behavioral psychologists and basically
what they do is provide 10-minute
scripted lessons so all you have to do
is sit down and read the words
everything's laid out and so it makes it
extremely simple for the parent to do
because the parent can do it even under
conditions of exhaustion and it only
takes 10 minutes of attention on this on
the part of the child and in three
months you get you don't only get word
recognition literacy you get the ability
for the child to start to comprehend
that the phrase and sentence level which
is by the way when spontaneous enjoyment
of reading kicks in right because the
automatization of letter and word
recognition is effortful and that's even
true up to the level of the phrase but
as soon as you can get a phrase at a
glance then it starts to become
entertaining rather than ever yeah yeah
exactly it's hard to thresh
so so now you said well if you use these
behavioral methods and and train
teachers who are very untrained about
exactly what to do you can imagine as
well that's much more positive for them
too because the classroom isn't chaotic
and unstructured and one of the
joys of being a teacher and there are
many things about being a teacher that
aren't joyful is to actually see that
what you're doing has some positive
effect so so teachers are a little
ambivalent about this because it also it
it they feel like it removes some of
their uh uh autonomy yeah and you can
worry about that once they're expert oh
absolutely so I I get that and but so
again we're not saying that if you spend
this money everything will be perfect
we're saying it'll be better and we know
how much better on average because it's
pretty good exactly twice as good yeah
and the other way is to remember that
the kids are struggling mostly so almost
everywhere in the world we put all the
12 year olds in the same grade for all
the 11 year olds in the same grade
and that somewhat Works in red countries
because everybody has been going to
school and have enough food and we're
you know paying attention but in poor
country these kids are all over the
place so some of them are struggling I
have no idea what's going on some of
them are incredibly bored and way ahead
and don't really bother about the
teacher what is the teacher going to do
when you have you know this vast I mean
you're going to try to sort of Hit the
middle and you're going to fail with
most of these kids
one way that we know works really well
is to teach at the right level yeah so
that's the zone of proximal development
exactly so you say here if you're in a
sixth grade there's a few people who are
actually at seventh grade level there's
a few there are sixth grade there's a
lot of they're in a fourth grade and
there's even some that are first grade
if you imagine you actually teach each
one at their right level they will learn
a lot more now you can do that in two
ways one is that you actually split them
out in the into these grades that's
that's socially a little hard because
you put you know 12 year olds together
with six-year-olds yeah and you know you
sort of point out 12 year olds yes he's
not that smart kind of thing yeah uh
it takes uh you need more teachers to do
that you do that one hour a day they do
that in pratham for instance in India
and it works and we know it works so
again it costs about 21 dollars per kid
and it delivers about the same as what
we talk about the structured uh teacher
plans it delivers about two years of
learning for every one year you go to
school this is just one hour a day so
again fantastic improvements so that's a
that's probably the only hour that they
actually learn very likely but again uh
for social benefits uh it's probably a
really bad idea to imagine having the 12
year old and six-year-old yeah together
all the time and that's why it's just
one hour a day uh at least that's how
the studies
yes yes that's what we're basing it on
another way to do it which I I like more
you know who who am I to know uh um is
to do this with technology so you
basically do this with tablets so you
buy a bunch of tablets and the kids will
one hour a day go and sit down with a
tablet and the tablet very quickly
learns who you are uh you obviously log
into that particular one you have a
program that teaches them either
mathematics or the the local language
and it will be in the local language and
it very quickly finds out oh you're at
that level so I'm going to start
teaching you at this level it is one of
the most enjoyable hours of the day it
sure it is man and again zone of
proximal development defines enjoyment
right enjoyment technically you get a
dopamine kick
from anything that is associated with
positive emotion and what dopamine does
is indicate that you're moving at the
proper rate towards a desired goal
that's the actual signal and then that
feels rewarding but it also the dopamine
actually strengthens the circuits that
are co-activated with with those events
so if you put the kid in the zone of
proximal development where they're on
the incremental edge of learning not
only do they feel good about it but the
neural circuits that are operating at
that time grow more effectively so yeah
so that's all there's nothing about that
that isn't good no no exactly and again
this is fairly cheap it's 31 now this is
more expensive you have to buy the
tablets uh given that there you just
need it one hour a day a lot of
different students are going to be using
the same tablet you need to have a place
you can lock them in so they don't
disappear still some of them will
disappear also because of corruption uh
you probably also need some solar panels
because these places don't have
electricity uh to uh to recharge them uh
so every day they get charge all of that
is included in those costs the benefit
is that this will actually give almost
three years of learning for every one
year in school and that's an hour a day
this is just one hour a day so basically
if you spend eight hours a day seven
hours you learn virtually nothing like
you normally did and then one hour you
learn almost all of it isn't that
amazing that we can do that yeah well
computers are unbelievably good when
they're used properly at finding that
zone of proximal development and for for
for for for uh Necessities like basic
automatization say of letter recognition
computers are unbeatable because they
can do repeated Mass practice in a way
that would drive any adult start craving
math right because you could get the you
know a kid who can't see the difference
between D's and B's for example you
could just have them practice that 500
times you know for 15 minutes a day for
a week and they'd have the letter
recognition down you'd never get that in
the standard classroom not probably in
the entire educational lifetime time of
the child so yeah that's very cool
that's all that's all crucial bits here
is that the cost is still you still have
the teacher so the teacher will be
sitting in the room helping oversee this
actually they very rarely need them but
right you need to make sure that the
teachers don't think that the computers
are going to take over their job right
right uh and that's incredibly important
otherwise you're not going to have the
teachers play along and then you won't
be able and then is that it it doesn't
have to be the case that the computers
are going to replace their job and and
shouldn't be the case it just means that
their there the the teacher should be
available to help solve the problems
that the kids are encountering while
they're engaged in the learning exactly
and so so and and so overall so Malawi
for instance a country that we worked in
where we pointed this out as a very very
good intervention is now actually
setting up this for the entire primary
school system oh cool uh so yeah again
these are things that we
there's uh so there's about
467 million kids in primary school today
in in the uh and the poor half of the
world we're estimating what would it
cost to get 90 of them one of these
three things that we talk about we don't
know whether they interact we don't know
whether you can actually double up you
can both have uh you know a tablet and
have teacher plans we don't know whether
that works so there's no reason to
assume that it would drop out like I
doubt if it's I doubt if it's additive
and it would be lovely if it was
multiplicative but like if you look at
the effects of programs like Head Start
for example you don't get that
multiplicative effect but I think you
could reasonably assume some near linear
effect so so we're we're simply making
the very simple Assumption of saying we
don't know what different countries and
different schools would do so we're
simply assuming you do one-third of each
of these three things right which is a
rough approximation just simply to get a
sense of how much good would this do
turns out that this would do 65 of good
for every dollar spent so we would spend
about 9 9.8 billion dollars per year
over the Set uh over this decade and the
benefits would come only we're only look
at the productivity benefits that these
kids would become smarter yeah hence get
higher salaries that it means that they
would help produce more economic growth
in in their long-term future worth about
800 or 2 000 per kit depending on which
uh uh property we're talking about so
basically about 600 billion dollars a
year right this is by itself almost half
of the total economic benefit that we're
talking about this is also you know this
is education we're making everyone get
about four percent more over the
lifetime in productivity that's an
incredible achievement and again this is
a very small part as we talk about it's
very likely once you get started on this
you're going to do more of these yeah
yeah well you mentioned how many how
many of the Undiscovered Geniuses in the
world whose potential you would unlock I
mean you get one Genius Like Norman
burlog and orlog and the entire planet's
different and so and that's one of the
advantages of all these extra mouths to
feed is that you know one of ten
thousand of those people is going to be
one person in ten thousand and we could
definitely use more of those definitely
definitely
we'll be right back first we wanted to
give you a sneak peek at Jordan's new
series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
[Music]
bend the fabric of reality and that you
can treat people instrumentally and that
you can bow to the Tyrant and violate
your conscience without cause you will
pay the piper it's going to call you out
of that slavery into Freedom even if
that pulls you into the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
is presented precisely as that spirit
that allies itself with the cause of
Freedom against tyranny I want villains
to get punished but do you want the
villains to learn before they have to
pay the ultimate price that's such a
Christian question
right so okay so that's number five
what's number six number six let's look
at malaria so malaria is a big problem
with the world uh it used to be
incredibly deadly across the world so we
have this idea of malaria being a
tropical disease and and typically one
that happens in Africa which is
absolutely true today but it used to be
everywhere so Austin was malaria
Washington was malaria it was too damn
cold in Canada for malaria
in the U.S 36 of the U.S states were
endemic in malaria uh we have malaria
and Finland and Archangel in Russia uh
it was you know huge in in Moscow during
the second world war it was pretty much
everywhere so we estimate about
one-tenth of all death uh in 1900 was
because of uh malaria uh but mosquitoes
happen to be the worst enemy of mankind
really really bad I mean for a lot of
reasons
transfer of uh the malaria parasite yeah
what happened was and this is true for a
lot of development well we got rich and
we got medication so when you get rich
you start draining this water right
that's what England did and you know
mosquitoes live in swamps so that
actually reduced the amount of of uh of
uh mosquitoes you also get better
nourished and that means that when you
get malaria you don't have as bad of a
reaction you don't get as a sick you can
also afford more uh uh protection so
you'll have build a house with screens
for instance then you don't get uh uh
then you don't get malaria and then you
can afford the medication so you know
back in the 1600s we found queenine
the park from a a tree yeah
it's in tonic for anybody yeah
and and uh and actually that was what
people were drinking in India gin and
tonic that was yeah at least
justification for it right
um and and uh the uh um uh the Spanish
got incredibly rich on this and they
actually kept it on the wraps for a very
long time so only very rich
well eventually the uh the Dutch found a
way to smuggle some of those seeds out
and they uh they grew in in Indonesia
and then you know we got a lot more
quinine eventually the world uh or the
uh uh uh the parasite uh got resistant
to queenine uh that also happened to the
artificial uh uh uh uh uh production of
it that we that we then turn on now we
have artemisinin and we're starting to
see the same kind of thing happening so
getting drugs is obviously important but
it's not the only part of the solution
so basically we eradicated this in most
of Rich world there's virtually no
malaria in the rich World it used to be
huge in India for instance it's
virtually no malaria there either and
that's over how many decades in India so
this is this is over the last century uh
basically that we got rid of it because
you got rich because uh you have uh
medication but and this is crucial we
also have much nicer mosquitoes and
mosquito uh and and malaria parasites so
are mosquitoes like to bite uh uh uh uh
livestock as well and that matters
because what you need for transmission
and malaria is that I have malaria the
mosquito bites me and then it flies over
and bite you right right but if there's
a nice cow right next to you it might
bite the cow and that and then there's
no transmission so if you have a lot of
livestock and you have more livestock as
you get right so we need to breed cows
that are more delicious to mosquitoes
exactly but the problem this is why we
have almost all malaria in Africa is
that the mosquitoes only the mosquitoes
are in Africa only like to bite humans
so they have much more intense uh uh
transmission of malaria and what what
basically happened in all kinds of other
places of the world was we disrupted
part of the transmission and you really
just need to disrupt it enough that it's
only the female mosquito right that the
female mosquito and typically don't get
to bite two people so it doesn't get to
bite one that has it and then transfer
it to someone else but it dies after one
and a half of those for for a number of
different reasons we just need to get to
that but in Africa they bite so many
times before they die that even if you
disrupt part of the transmission it
doesn't help they also badly set up
because the parasite is more deadly in
Africa than anywhere else it's just you
know bad luck of the draw that's why you
have almost all the uh uh the malaria in
Africa now it's 95 it's actually just
four countries half of it uh so about
600 000 people die every year more than
half of them die in Nigeria in Tanzania
in Niger and the Democratic Republic of
Congo so it's a very very limited
problem to sub-Saharan Africa and what
we then look at is uh there you know
obviously you need to have medication
and we we do have medication across the
world but the most important part is to
get mosquito Nets we know that that's a
very cheap way of dramatically reducing
so these would be and that's red versus
the person-to-person biting of the
mosquitoes so these are insecticide
treated mosquito Nets uh so they work in
two ways you sleep under them and so
they they have this physical barrier
that prevents the mosquito to come in
yeah and also when it sits on these and
it often will do it'll actually die from
the pesticide and those two things can
actually disrupt uh malaria so we
estimate if you increase this uh so
remember all of these uh Nets are being
distributed we've distributed more than
uh uh
two or three hundred million Nets every
year
um all of these nets need to be
distributed we're assuming what would
happen if we increase that by 10 yeah
that will have a cost yes but it'll also
have a huge benefit because you'll
actually be able to see about a
reduction of half uh come 2030 of the
number of people that get infected with
malaria so we could actually reduce uh
this by half over the decade that would
be about 200 000 people that we could
save every year and if we could do that
it would also save much more on the
hospitalization cost and remember this
would also be about 240 million cases of
malaria so most people get malaria they
don't die right they just get really
really sick and then it recurs too A lot
of them so there's not that many people
many many of the people will get it
several times and that means that they
will be less productive they can't go to
work we actually estimate the benefit
would also be about 10 billion dollars
both in in preserved health care costs
that's more than just the the Nets would
cost and in uh productivity cost the
total cost is 1.1 billion dollars so
again that's a 10 increase in the number
of Nets that are distributed so for
every dollar spent you do 48 dollars of
good it's an amazing return you do so so
you know even if you just look at the
the save the malaria parasite
environmentalists haven't come after you
on that Frontier no I don't know I think
I think most people
feel that yes mosquitoes and malaria
parasites are something that we could
you know we could just have in a zoo we
could have we could have fewer of them
yeah certainly okay it's good to have a
consensus on that first yeah so so
fundamentally we could do an amazing
amount of good and you could actually
just by looking at the savings
you would get more Savings in the
healthcare sector than the extra bed
nets would cost why are we not doing it
because it's two different pots of money
right right so and of course weird
structural impediments right and it
comes a couple of years later so yeah
that's the kind of thing again imagine
if you know I don't know uh Elon Musk
was to say I am going to spend 1.1
billion Elon are you listening yeah and
then we could get we could save 200 000
every year yeah
facing achievement and again this is
something it's fun to set up some
crowdfunding projects for some of these
things you know because it'd be
interesting I was thinking about
taxation the other night and Taxation is
well people take your money and then
they do with it what they want and you
might say well we have to have taxes and
I really wonder I wonder if you put
forward a sufficiently attractive
proposal and ask people if they would be
willing to donate if you could raise
enough money to do these sorts of things
without compulsion you know if the story
was set up right this isn't tremendously
expensive and besides you wouldn't have
to raise all the money to start doing it
and so wow so that's something very very
much worth thinking through okay so
that's number six right malaria anything
else on the malarial front no okay
what's number seven so uh uh chronic
diseases or what's known as
non-communicable diseases so you know in
days have passed almost everyone died
from infectious disease chronic disease
is actually only something you die of if
you don't die from infectious disease
anymore right it's something you die of
when you get old mostly uh and so it's
something we should actually be happy
about most of the world now dies from uh
chronic disease not from that's the
definition of human progress it is you
know later death so if you think about
it we're very worried about the fact
that more and more people were dying
from cancer more and more people who
were dying from heart disease right
cardiovascular disease uh and the world
and we thought oh my god there must be
something in the environment right stuff
like that no we're just living long
enough to have it yes exactly we've
stopped dying from infectious disease
and this is even true in the low and Low
Middle income countries now uh we're
seeing the the uh you know people live
longer and longer and now they will die
from chronic disease so we need to start
having a conversation about can we do
something about that so we work with one
of the big teams from the John Hopkins
University who've actually done all
these studies and all of these things
and so they gave us a very very long
list of the stuff that you can do and
some of them are really really uh cost
effective
I'm just going to tell you about two of
them uh because there's a lot of them
and most of them are fairly small one of
them is that a lot of people live with
heart failure so it kills about uh yeah
probably 350 000 people uh a year that
we could avoid uh from heart failure
it's basically the fact that you're uh
that your heart is tired yeah uh and it
can't pump enough uh and it causes you
exhaustion you you get out of breath and
eventually it means to you that you
limit your movements you don't become as
productive you have a bad life yeah um
and one of the simple ways you can do
something about that is give people
diuretics uh so basically P more they
get rid of some of their water it means
that they become there is less that the
heart has to pump out to uh and so it's
simply it's a very cheap way of making
sure that people can live longer now
they will still die eventually from this
but on average we can save about 350 000
people uh every year
and they will live about six years
longer this is very different from
malaria which is very much about young
kids uh this is mostly older people that
you can help so that's one way it has
benefit cost ratio of 41. uh the other
thing and this has become very prevalent
in all of the rich world is tackling
people's high blood pressure so the
biggest killer in the world is
cardiovascular disease so that basically
heart disease and stuff that's related
to the blood vessels
um
and much of this is due to high blood
pressure we have very very cheap
medication a lot of people in the rich
world are in heart medication uh uh
sorry are in the blood pressure uh
hypertension yeah uh Medicaid I am uh
and and you know it has some cost you
need to screen people you need to have
the doctor decide uh which pills are you
going to get you need to go back and
check whether they work uh once or twice
a year and obviously you can do some of
this cheaper so we're looking a lot of
on replacing the doctor with nurses yeah
right and that kind of stuff and you
also need to decide what kind of drugs
do you need some of them are very cheap
some are not quite as cheap if you do
the whole math you can probably save
again about almost a million people uh
every year at a benefit cost of about
16. so again a very good investment you
can do a lot of good for these things
but and they have there's more as a as a
Steve Jobs used to say
um there's also uh looking at some of
these things that kill us some most so
that would be tobacco alcohol
trans fat and salt we know these things
are bad for you some of these things are
hard to do something about but some of
them are very easy to do something about
so for instance tobacco yeah you can
just simply put and well Health
Organization estimate we should have a
tax that make them four times as
expensive cigarettes as the production
costs yeah
um that's sort of a Target yeah well I'm
I'm not much for top-down government
intervention but the fact that since
I've been Young
smoking has just about disappeared in
Canada and I just can't see that as
anything but a fundamental social good
exactly so what we look at is the cost
of doing that is you know natural
negligible uh yeah it's just a changing
of some uh some laws and then you need a
little bit of enforcement but the real
cost is the fact that there's a lot of
smokers who will now not be able to
smoke and they will have you know
they're losing a benefit they clearly
like to be able to smoke yeah but that
benefit is bad outweighed by both the
health benefits that they will get but
also as you point out all the younger
Generations who then won't be able to
who won't take up smoking because it's
so damn expensive so fundamentally what
we find is that having a a tobacco tax
uh generates a benefit of about 105. so
a really really good investment and
again it can save about a couple hundred
thousand uh people from dying uh
likewise with uh alcohol alcohol has all
kinds of bad effects people clearly like
it so you also need to take that into
account the cause of and solution to all
the world's problems according to Homer
Simpsons okay there you go uh and and
you know but but it creates a lot of
accidents it create a lot of violence uh
and and
you also get people who commit suicide
because of this it has a lot of diseases
and a little bit like secondhand smoking
it also negatively affects a lot of
other people because you know it leads
to spousal abuse and child abuse and
contributed to cancer especially with
smoking yeah so so there are lots of
reasons why we want to regulate again uh
you can both regulate it through
advertising uh so you can't advertise in
certain shows and that kind of stuff and
also through just simply High attack
taxation those things we estimate in
total if you add up all of this will
cost about 4.4 billion dollars but it'll
save one and a half million lives every
year again this is just one of those
things it'll it'll generate benefits of
23 dollars back on every dollar it's not
the very very best thing this is still
23 to one return it's an amazing uh
return this is one of the things we
should be doing I mean people are happy
when they can invest their money and get
a one in 20 return this is a 23 to 1
return that's 400 times better and yeah
and it's not at the top of your list all
right number eight so land tenure
security this is something that most
people have noticed no no if you buy an
apartment or a house in the rich world
yeah you own it yeah strangely enough
yes that's really really nice it means
when you put in a new kitchen you know
it'll be nice for you and eventually
it'll increase the sales value yeah now
in most of developing countries you
don't know if you own stuff yeah because
there's really bad registration
or Hernando uh Commander DeSoto De Soto
yeah yeah he laid that out very nicely
about 20 years ago exactly he points out
this and and I'm I'm starting to talk
about owning a house or or an apartment
because that's what we understand in the
rich world but of course for the vast
majority of people in the poor part of
the world it's about owning your land
yes exactly a place where you're going
to be farming you don't know if you own
this you have really bad cadastral
surveys and you have uh you know these
these uh different scripts typically in
different parts of the government that
tells you maybe you own it maybe this
other guy owns it and there's a no clear
title yes yeah well the thing is owner
there is no difference between ownership
and title right you own something
insofar as no one else can stake a claim
to it and so if the title is unclear
because you kind of think of ownership
as something like physical presence it's
not that it's Undisputed it's Undisputed
sovereignty over that territory and a
lot of that has to do with the
conceptual web the paperwork has to be
done properly the titles have to be
transferred uh the the I know this
DeSoto was so interesting he took out
his teams of economists into the field
into these uh tent cities you know these
burials essentially because so many
people have migrated into cities and all
these people who were in these tent
cities
um squatters so to speak had land
but of course the boundaries weren't set
and they didn't have title and so they
couldn't raise a mortgage so one of the
things DeSoto did because almost all the
people that they were studying had dogs
and the dogs knew where the boundaries
were because dogs know those sorts of
things and they negotiate with other
dogs about it quite intensely and other
people and so one of the things they
used to demarcate territory to start the
process of title registration going so
because the thing is if you're squatting
on a piece of land in an urban area
you're actually not poor you just can't
capitalize on what you own just and most
many many people start their small
business by getting a second loan on
their on their property and so you can
start capitalizing what you own can't do
that without title so no exactly so what
we're looking at is that most places in
the developing World lack cadastral
surveys is it's basically that you have
a list of everything of all land in your
nation yeah and who does that belong to
so yeah right unless you have that list
you you can't write the names in front
of them right so you can't tax
effectively then either neither that uh
but but mostly you just don't know who
owns what yeah so you need to have these
surveys done they're called catastrous
service and you also need to have
effective registration which is somewhat
expensive what happens when you do this
and and you're absolutely right one of
the things and that was kind of DeSoto
he basically said this means that
there's a lot of debt Capital you can't
raise yes yeah he was talking about 10
trillion dollars that the poor can't use
as collateral for making a loan that
could actually help them start a
business and they're also not motivated
to do improvements on their property
because there's no evidence that they'll
only improve if if you own this if you
don't know if you own the land you're
likely to not plant something that'll
only give fruit in say five or ten years
because you don't know if you're gonna
own it you're not going to take out all
the stones because that'll only really
be a benefit in the next 30 Years yeah
so you're not going to improve it as
much who will improve it somewhat but
just not nearly as much and of course if
you own don't know if you own the house
in the city so about a fifth of all
people in the developing world uh
believe that over the next five years
they'll be evicted from where they live
right now yeah that's right that's right
that's terrible terrible thing to have
hanging over your head and it certainly
affects your unbelievably demoralizing
exactly right and anxiety provoking so
what we're trying to do is to basically
set up the system so that it's more
secure uh and what you do is then you
have the surveys you you start working
with all these different uh uh people
who might have claims remember yeah once
you start this process of saying who
actually owns this bit of land you will
get a lot of dissatisfaction yeah
because people say no I own it I own and
and then you need some sort of conflict
resolution some of it can be dealt on
the local level you'll also need a lot
more uh uh uh Court ability so yeah
access to courts yeah so many developing
countries uh uh it's already taking up a
third or a half of all all uh civil
legisl uh uh uh litigation litigation uh
uh that is land litigation uh and this
will uh you know balloon certainly in
the first couple of years so that you do
this the benefits so that is those are
real costs yeah but the benefit
will be that you will be able to have
much more productive land yeah so what
we're finding is on on agricultural side
you will basically have 15 higher
productivity that's amazing opportunity
uh for for people in the land area now
this will also be fairly expensive so we
estimate the benefit cost ratio is about
18 for cities because it costs less
there's less land to a document there's
many more people in there and the values
are typically higher there it simply
means when we know this from a lot of
studies it simply means that your house
or your uh your apartment becomes a lot
more worth and right simply because you
now know that you own it people are
willing to pay more for it so it's about
well any uncertainty about ownership
will reduce the value of Any Given piece
of property to almost zero yes so the
total cost is about 2.2 billion dollars
a year and the net benefit sorry the
benefit is about 49 billion dollars in
increased productivity and Agriculture
and increased value in cities right so
as you pointed out you're going to have
a substance will increase in people's
feeling of security as well well not
just feeling of security actual security
because they're not likely to be evicted
in the same way but of course economists
would tend to say that's exactly what's
reflected in the price sure sure and so
we we we would tend to say we've said
that but absolutely you're right that it
probably means a lot more that you are
actually able to start doing all kinds
of other things yeah well you'll take
risks because well one of the things
that stops people from taking risk is
the degree of risk they're already
exposed to so because people can
tolerate a certain amount of uncertainty
but but um and also remember we're we're
just looking at what we know works so we
know that there's good evidence that if
you know you're only allowance look if
you know you own the land you will be 15
more productive yeah but chances are you
will also take out a second loan you'll
start a little business you'll do all
these other things they'll actually make
your whole life much much better but so
all of the stuff that I'm telling you
now is probably very conservative yeah
well that's another thing I really like
about your approach is that you you you
don't go out into the derivative end of
economic projection right you're staying
fairly close to the to the direct
consequences and also you know look
these are so good things we don't need
to saturate them and and also and and I
think this is important for the whole
project you asked me early on uh you
know why should we why should we believe
this you know yes these are uh people
from some really really good
universities and so on but it's also
because we don't have a stake in any of
this honestly I don't right I don't care
what is the best outcomes you know I'm
looking at it and saying all right this
this was what came out of it uh it could
have been other things I'm I'm not an
advocate for any one of these things
yeah except for the fact that the
evidence shows us this is an incredibly
good thing well you can tell that as
well and so another one of the things I
liked about your approach is that
there's no acts being ground and the
evidence for that is well there's no
bias in terms of the selection of the
domains that you're attempting to make
progress on I mean uh land surveys and
the provision of prenatal and natal care
to women aren't in the same bin and so
there's there's no implicit or explicit
agenda happening here except the ones we
already laid out which is something like
most amount of good done for the least
you know the least uh the least
privileged people at the lowest possible
cost you have to accept that as a
reasonable framework to begin with and
you can debate about that but once
having done that I do think you end up
with the kind of outcomes that you've
been describing so we're going to move
on to uh I believe it's Issue Number
Nine now I'm hoping you keep I I do
believe it's Issue Number Nine and so so
what are we what are we confronting on
that front so trade trade is one of
those things that a lot of economists
tell you are really really good uh it's
it's an obvious thing if you think about
it we talked about the uh you know
making your own toaster before yeah if
you have to do everything yourself
you're really bad at all of them and you
don't get a lot make your own computer
chip yes that's probably that's not a
good idea yeah uh and and and so what we
have basically achieved is one of the
reasons why we're so rich is that
everyone does what they do best yeah
that's Nations and individuals and
companies and then we trade among each
others uh so I do a tiny bit High
hopefully pretty well and then I get
everyone else to do you know my Mountain
Dew and all the other important things
in my life uh and and that's how we all
work and that's great that really makes
us all much more effective we should
have a lot of trouble it's also a way of
addressing inequality you know in some
fundamental sense because if we set up a
landscape where each person can operate
at their highest level of expertise well
that's pretty good deal for them but
it's and it means that the largest and
most diverse possible number of people
can play the game successfully it's an
interesting way of looking at inequality
because you might think well everyone
should contribute the same thing but
that's this is a way of doing that at a
meta level it's like no you you should
be encouraged to contribute where you
can contribute best even by your own
standards where you have real expertise
and it's a very rare person you find I
have a lot of very very impaired people
in my clinical practice you know who are
having a struggle in the broader
economic Market but it's almost
impossible to find someone who doesn't
have something that they can offer
that's of real practical utility on some
Dimension and and then a free trade
landscape opens up all these different
niches so that people can occupy them
regardless of their underlying skills
and talents let's say so I would tend to
agree with you I think we should
recognize the fact that you know when
when when trade opened up and we got
industrialization in the rich world it
was basically we took off and the rest
of the world didn't that's one of the
reasons why we have we've had a very
very unequal world for quite a while now
what's happening is that a lot of the
poorer world is catching up yeah and and
that actually means that uh inequality
as dramatically dropped uh at least
since 2000 a large part of that of
course is China also some of it because
yeah yeah and that's bringing up the
bottoman absolutely so this is this is
good uh but but you know there is an
argument and that's one of the reasons
why I think inequality is somewhat of uh
of a slippery slope yeah inequality is
not by itself uh an amazing achievement
because one of the simplest ways to make
sure you don't have inequalities by
making everyone poor yes and communist
approach and that's not a you know not
necessary most people wouldn't see that
as a great outcome right uh and and so
what we have to make sure is that
everybody can participate in this and
one of the problems that have happened
so we used to be very focused on saying
we should have more uh trade that's a
good thing it actually means that we all
become richer uh but as we increasingly
realized uh you know with the battle
through Seattle back in was it 1999 and
you know the whole uh the whole uh doh
around and essentially the breakdown in
more uh free trade agreements was that a
lot of people realized but there are
also negative impacts from trade and
that's absolutely true if you have trade
and if you have more trade it means if
you work in an area where you're not
quite as good as the guys who are
trading yeah you will see your salary
drop or you will possibly yeah or or if
you're facing corrupt uh corrupt
competition I mean this is partly what
happened to the working class in the
let's say outside of China is that the
Chinese were very efficient at providing
low-cost labor but there was also no
shortage of corruption in that and
unfortunately the people who paid the
highest price for that were working
class people in the west now they got
cheaper goods and the Chinese weren't
starving and were much less likely to
propose a geopolitical danger as a
consequence of that but it was still
fell disproportionately on their backs
and and this is you know sort of the
Rust Belt of the US and many other
places some of it may be unreasonable
and part of China but I think it was
also just inevitable that if you open up
for a wide range of things that you can
do much cheaper in China and yeah
Vietnam and many other places uh you
will see some people who will actually
see their pay go down
economists were very bad at doing that
and I I've been partially uh guilty of
that we would just say oh everybody gets
much richer yeah which is not quite true
a lot of people get a lot richer most
people probably in the long run get
better off yeah but there are some
people who are very clearly in the short
and medium term not better off yeah and
we need to say that so we've actually
done I'm very excited about this
particular paper
we've done probably the first paper that
actually tries to look at both the cost
and the benefits of free trade yeah uh
we've done it with a standard uh uh uh
free trade model uh We've we we're not
looking at particularly how do you
increase trade we just simply say let's
assume we increase trade by five percent
you could do that through a Free Trade
Agreement you could do it by making a
transportation cheaper so that more
people will want to uh transport you
could have lower tariffs there's a lot
of different ways you can do it we're
not talking about that we're simply
saying let's look at the case of us
having five percent more trade what
would that do what are the costs what
are the benefits and it turns out that
not surprisingly overall we'd be much
better off uh the world would be about
11 trillion dollars better off over the
next 50 years but
there's a cost of about a trillion
dollars and that's the cost of all the
people who work in import exposed right
Industries so you know essentially think
of and this is obviously an old term uh
term thinking but think of the people
who work in t-shirt sewing Industries in
rich countries yeah yeah they're not
going to have a job in five or ten years
if you open up for trade now eventually
they'll be doing other works and I I
think there are very few people who sit
around and feel like I really missed out
on that uh you know t-shirt sewing
opportunity right yeah so overall in the
long run we all get better off but there
are certainly losses those losses are
mostly in the rich world because and
this is when you think about it it's not
surprising because they have to where
yeah that's where you were least
effective at doing the stuff that poor
countries do really effectively right
right and and so what we see is that in
the rich world the benefit cost ratio of
free trade or or trade is only seven to
one so you get seven dollars back you
get free cheaper and are Goods in
Walmart but yes some people also lose
out and those people of course lose out
in a much bigger way yeah they're the
ones who are going to be shouting at the
politicians and likely make the
politicians say ah maybe we don't want
voting for Donald Trump exactly whereas
in the poorer part of the world the
benefits vastly outweigh the costs so
we're we're estimating uh the the costs
of free trade is about 1.7 billion
dollars a year that's not nothing but
the benefits is 166 billion dollars wow
so the benefits and this is in the
bottom half of the of the bottom half of
the world yeah 95 to one wow so again
it's rich people who are saying oh maybe
we shouldn't have so much free trade
although it actually helps everyone it's
the poorest of the rich people who are
most charged by that right which is not
a trivial problem I get that and we
should certainly address that and we
should also recognize that even in the
rich world we get seven dollars back for
every dollar how is this best to it how
do you best address the problem of the
poorest strata in the rich World bearing
the brunt of the free trade problem well
so I think first of all you need to
recognize yes yes and then you also
should say we should have much better
re-education so these these guys should
have the opportunity first of all you
know I come from you know a rich welfare
Estates where we would take care of
these people we would fund them for many
years and say you know you you can get
unemployment insurance for quite a while
uh you you will get a re-education you
can do all kinds of other things so
access to retraining yes and
re-education sorry that sounds like it
yeah yeah
so more secondary education more
education uh that you would get all
those things that would enable you to
now get another job and of course what
one things that can happen is that you
actually realize oh I actually really
like doing something else you know right
stuck in one place and and so this could
also be an opportunity again that's hard
sell rated yeah well you know why I
developed this software to help people
develop a vision for their life you know
so what they do it's a prioritization
exercise that's again in some ways it's
it's very it's a very it's a very good
thing for people to do and we had the we
had students I'll just tell you one
study they went to a trade school a
Mohawk College in Ontario and they sat
down and wrote out a vision for their
life on seven dimensions and so that was
the dimensions are intimate relationship
family uh Job and Career Education
personal uh self-care on the medical and
and and uh psychological front
regulation of Temptation like alcohol
and drug abuse and use of time outside
of work right so now imagine you could
have what you wanted
now you could have it in those seven
domains
um five years down the road how would
you strategize towards that so we had
students do this for 90 minutes when
they first came into their orientation
session before they went to trade school
or at night they wrote for 90 minutes
about what they've done in the last two
weeks and we decreased the dropout rate
50 percent and so for a 10 intervention
by the way and uh in other studies we'd
increase the GPA 35 but what was really
cool was that the biggest increases were
among the most disaffected populations
so the biggest effect was for minority
men and it was for minority men who had
a bad academic record who didn't have
well-formulated plans about what they
were going to college for and so the
reason I'm bringing that up is because
in these one of the ways of addressing
these problems of a transition let's say
an entry-level economic jobs that would
be displaced would be also to retool the
way that we handle those situations
psychologically so that people could see
an expanding Horizon of opportunity
instead of just what would you say the
forcible removal of their one source of
income now it's not an easy thing to do
but it's not impossible and I've worked
with lots of clinical clients who had to
make you know lateral job Transitions
and if they could get their attitude
properly oriented and with a bit of luck
they could take the opportunity to raise
themselves up the economic hierarchy
instead of merely suffering as a
consequence of the displacement so these
things aren't impossible so so that's
part of what we need to do yeah maybe we
should have that in our yeah yeah but
then we have 13 and that doesn't sound
good yeah yeah right right right right
we'd have to add an addition yeah okay
so so so but basically increase trade
yeah you will have huge impact uh for
the poor part of the world and we could
do this also well for the rich part of
the world okay so absolutely okay um so
this is so that was what was this while
we're on ten now all right ten so 10 is
skilled migration so economists like to
say we should have free trade so we
should have movement of goods yeah but
we should also have movement of people
and this will have a lot more of sort of
a political Dimension yeah feel somewhat
uncomfortable about some of these things
but let me just give you the economic
argument first so a lot of economists
will tell you and I think there's some
value to this point uh if you look at
for instance people who work in
McDonald's they have a very very set
setup of how should you work yet a
person who works in McDonald in Nigeria
makes about 1 15 of what the same person
with the same skills get in the U.S this
is simply a question of saying if you
live in a country true where you're
surrounded by a lot of other really
highly productive people you are also
more productive and so what happens is
if you take a person who has grown up in
say Nigeria and we've done we've looked
at those kinds of cases uh that have
have had Nigerian education and then
moved to the U.S they have about five
times as much as high an income as if
they'd stayed back in in yeah simply
because they're more productive uh they
still have have had a pretty bad
education which is why they don't get 15
times as much but they get much higher
productivity so economists would tend to
say
why don't we let everyone move right now
if you did that so there's surveys for
instance Bangladesh they asked young
people uh if you could would you like to
move to another country right uh 92 say
they would like to at least try now a
lot of people would probably return
because they also you know there's
something about your home country and
all that kind of stuff but yeah a lot of
people would want to move
uh economists will tell you there are
trillions of dollars to be to be had out
there so they're talking about you know
if you just let out you know let
everyone move it turns out that the
model showed that about 2.4 billion
people would move to the rich countries
of workers that's you know like five
times as many four times as many as what
we have of all workers in the rich
countries so from an economist point of
view you just say oh they become more
you know uh uh productive I think it's
leaving out some really really big
things like like the carrying capacity
for transformation in the countries
imagine just you know building the
houses and all that yeah it's just
I I think it's slightly a one of those
uh uh castles in the air that academics
are very good at doing yeah I think
there's some point to that making making
in this so you know uh uh Tom shelling
uh one of the Nobel laureates I used to
work with he's unfortunately dead now uh
he would usually say well if if we could
imagine uh if we worry about poverty in
the in the poor World imagine if you
could move a large portion of these
people from the poor world to the rich
world and make them Rich that would be
good wouldn't it and yes it would be
good but but not if it means that it
will make everyone in the rich world
really really annoyed for instance
because it actually will reduce their
pay many other things so yeah look this
is not going to happen but what could
happen that's what that's the proposal
that we're looking at is skilled
migration so Canada for instance
actually Embraces the idea of bringing
in skilled migrants because it's a great
way for Canada to uh to become richer
but there's a uh many places there's a
lack of of Engineers and doctors and so
we look at that now remember if you move
these people from poor countries
actually means that the poor countries
will lose out yes yes they will have
what what people sort of uh uh tend to
call uh brain drain yeah but we actually
find them that's also what most of the
literature finds is if you move them
they will also send more yeah we really
saw this in with Indians in Silicon
Valley right because there was a
tremendous brain drain from India
especially from the Indian Institute of
Technology to Silicon Valley but man
they dumped billions of dollars back
into India and generated a whole I.T
industry there that's just like killing
it that's a great that's a great example
yeah yeah and so we actually estimate
this will even be beneficial for the
poor countries so the sender countries
but of course this will mostly be
beneficial for those people who are
moving to the rich world and it will be
beneficial also for the rich world but
because these are poor people we're
basically making poor people anybody any
sense of how you prioritize what skills
should be required so is that a nation
to Nation no we looked at a lot of
different uh interventions and only
doctors and Engineers will have such a
great uh differential that it actually
pays more than fifteen dollars back in
college I see because if you move you
know your uh uh your McDonald's worker
you will get benefit but not just nearly
as much and there's also a number of
costs there so
what you're doing is you're maximizing
the ability of the most in-demand
productive people to move and your sense
is that will be a benefit to them but
also to to the countries that they've
left behind and uh yes and also to the
countries that they move yes of course
and we're only saying 10 more than what
you already have so right a country that
has a lot we'll take in a little more
countries have almost no will take 10
more of that almost so so basically what
it is it's a more intelligent
immigration it's a politically feasible
thing to do yeah yeah and it turns out
that it'll cost about 2.8 billion
dollars but it'll generate about 50
billion dollars in benefits mostly to
these poor uh people who are now moving
to uh uh uh rich countries and becoming
more uh productive but also because
they'll be sending back money and
helping generate more education and more
uh investing and as you pointed out and
we're investing in in local uh
businesses right back where they came
from right so overall it's a good idea
it's not know it's it's about 20 back on
the dollar so it's a good idea it's not
the best thing yeah we should do all
that again it's number ten again well
well uh so so um uh so we should also
talk about one other infectious disease
so we talked about malaria okay uh but
tuberculosis side shoot or is this
number 11 no this is 11. okay it's 11.
uh well if we're counting yeah at some
point we need to go back and make sure
because we're not quite sure what the
12th is but we'll figure that out uh but
you know 11th uh tuberculosis and again
there's no point we're not making a list
of priorities we're saying all 12 are
amazing yeah so uh uh uh okay so they're
not necessarily rank ordered they're not
12. they're not okay okay no and that
and that's crucial for us because we're
not usually we we we would have rank
ordered yeah but these are so cheap and
so good that we should just do them
their rank ordered sort of if you will
compared to everything else yeah okay
okay we're simply saying let's do those
12. so so that's also why so that would
be like advice to any national
government do at least one of these
things
twelve yeah exactly so number 11 is
tuberculosis uh so tuberculosis is a
huge disease it's killed over the last
200 years about a billion people yeah uh
you know if you think back in the 1800s
pretty much anyone you know from the
1800s probably died from tuberculosis
about a fourth of all death was due to
tuberculosis and all the you know the
people who died before that time
typically tuberculosis uh it's a very
City oriented uh disease so we've known
it throughout human history but it was
really only when people got together in
big cities you need a lot of people
together in in in pretty dense areas for
tuberculosis is really to get going so
it happened you know around 1600 uh in
European cities we had a little bit of
it in Rome and Rome back in in ancient
times but this was really something that
came to the fore in 16 1700. so in in 17
in 1800 in London for instance
um about one of every hundred people
died every year from tuberculosis so
more people died from tuberculosis in
the 1800 then died from all diseases
today in London uh you know it's just
outstanding how many how much this is
now what basically fixed it was we got
an antibiotics we know how to get rid of
it so we got rid of it around 40s 50s so
it basically drops down it dropped down
before because you got richer you'd uh
when you when you're better fed you
don't get uh tuberculosis easily you
sent people off to sanatoria so uh we
think it didn't actually help very much
but it got rid of them right so they
didn't infect someone else but we
basically got rid of tuberculosis yet is
the world's leading infectious disease
killer so it kills some 1.4 1.5 million
people it killed last year more people
than dying from covet so covet is
certainly outweighed it in 2020 and 2021
not in 2022 and so
tuberculosis back as the leading
infectious disease killer yeah virtually
nobody cares about it because we don't
get it anymore it's just right poor
people it's marginalized people yeah uh
and so in India in in uh when they uh
got independence in 1947
um they realized that they had a huge uh
tuberculosis problem they had about half
a million people dying from tuberculosis
every year last year India had about
half a million people dying from
tuberculosis now admittedly they've
grown to about four times the size so
it's a relatively smaller problem but
it's still a huge problem so we can save
most of these people by investing in two
things so it's basically about making
sure that we discover more of the
tuberculosis the big problem right now
is that we believe we don't know we
believe that about 10 or 11 million
people get tuberculosis every year but
we only diagnose about six of them so
the rest of them are this untreated
Reservoir now what happens is that when
you have tuberculosis you'll typically
go to a doctor but it's also very uh
stigmatizing to have tuberculosis in
many places so you kind of go to the
doctor and you hope him to say oh no
it's not tuberculosis right right if you
go to a private doctor you do that a lot
in India and many other places the
doctor obviously has an incentive to
keep you happy so he will likely say no
don't worry take this drug this other
thing you know take this green powder
whatever it is and so you don't get
treated and you know 45 of people who
remain untreated die from this so we
need to get more people identified you
do that by screening you need to do this
in large proportions so these are very
marginalized people it would be people
in slum cities yeah maybe people in
prisons and uh you know the the people
who do uh mining uh mining communities
those kinds of places where you screen
people so in Bangladesh for instance we
work with uh
uh the world's biggest uh NGO that that
has you know more than a million workers
there uh they would hire old women to
walk around and knock on people's doors
and say has anyone been coughing a lot
lately uh and you know try to get them
involved and then try to get them tested
and then you can get on treatment most
government actually offer this treatment
for free but the problem is it takes six
months to get rid of tuberculosis and if
you've ever gotten a medication for you
know you just have to take it for 14
days you get better after what you know
a week then it becomes hard to remember
yeah yeah and science is a huge problem
if you have to do this for a half a year
yeah you're likely not to do it so what
we're also saying is and and we're
working together in a way that'll
increase antibiotic resistance right
absolutely and if you stop yeah yeah
very very bad and suddenly get a
situation where the it becomes a
resistant tuberculosis yeah and it
becomes much more costly and much harder
to deal with and a much bigger Public
Health threat absolutely so what you
need to do is to incentivize people one
of the ways is you know I have some sort
of Alcoholics Anonymous kind of way
unique once a week and say yeah proudly
yes I took all my yeah a tuberculosis
medication you can get an app uh you can
also have premiums you know you get like
a juice box or something for every week
where you've done this uh where you've
taken your medication yeah and it seems
a little weird to pay people to take
their medication because it's weird once
you understand How likely it is that
people won't be compliant no you know
because they deny they have the illness
or they're skeptical of the drugs or
they forget because you do forget things
you have to do every day unless it's
really instilled as a habit and so no
compliance is a major problem yeah and
and and and remember if you have someone
who's untreated chances are that that
person every year will give on the
tuberculosis to somewhere between five
and fifteen other people wow so you know
by coughing so the the point is if we
can get that person to take his drugs or
drugs it means Not only would that
person survive but he or she won't pass
it on yeah and they won't be making this
a multi-drug resistant tuberculosis
right so we estimate that you can do
about 46 dollars of social good for
every dollar spent it'll cost
6.2 billion dollars but the benefit will
be and now I forget I have to look at my
you know there's too many numbers in
this project you said about 40 to 1. so
the benefit won't be about 200 million
uh so so sorry yes that's because I
don't actually remember that number it's
600 000 people will save every uh every
year for this uh for this decade but as
we get further in It's actually an
underestimate of how good it's going to
be because eventually we'll save almost
everyone we'll get tuberculosis down to
uh 100 200 right so it'd be nice to be
nice to Target that as a disease to
eradicate if that was possibility we've
eradicated smallpox and down here killed
off polio we eradicate a smallpox and
that was amazing achievement we haven't
gotten rid of Poland no and it turns out
it's really really hard to do these
things uh so so again we should probably
be careful about saying we'd love to
eradicate it turns out that that's very
hard uh smallpox only infects humans it
doesn't have a natural uh uh reservoir
uh as tuberculosis many other diseases
happen
why it's much much harder to get rid of
right right so what we're looking at is
minimalizing minimizing it to the degree
that that's possible so okay so why
don't you take a look at the list well I
I remember it now because it's okay okay
so number 12 is childhood vaccination uh
so you know obviously we know that
vaccinations are incredibly good uh
We've uh as you pointed out with
smallpox we've gotten rid of smallpox
smallpox was a reason why we started
with vaccinations it was you know it it
probably from uh before 1900 we estimate
that one in seven people of everyone
who's ever lived on the planet died from
smallpox uh and and and basically we got
rid of it it killed about 300 million in
in the 20th century and then we got rid
of it last documented case was in 1978.
this is an amazing achievement we
estimated
Wuhan that's re-cooking it up that's
true oh now you just left me with that
bad I didn't mention my uh anyway so so
you know fundamentally if we hadn't
gotten rid of it we estimate that every
year we would have about 5 million
people dying from smallpox that's just
an incredible achievement we've gotten
rid of a lot of measles yeah so we give
you know uh kids uh measles vaccinations
by all means please get your measles
vaccination there's a few people who
don't get it and that's a very bad idea
it saves you know literally millions of
children's lives uh we have uh we have
pertussis and tetanus and we have lots
of other things that we're vaccinating
against we're increasingly starting to
vaccinate against a lot of other things
that you probably haven't heard or maybe
haven't heard about wrote about viruses
oh so you know the major part of why a
lot of children get diarrhea if you get
rotavirus vaccinations you can actually
reduce the amount of diarrhea and also
reduce the number of kids that die great
investment we're also starting to
vaccinate against stuff that only
happens far into the future so uh for
instance hepatitis uh B uh that's not
something that kids die from now but if
you're vaccine now it means they avoid
getting you know a chronic liver disease
and eventually die from liver cancer
when they become old if you vaccinate
against human papilloma virus HPV you
avoid especially girls getting cervical
cancer these are all great Investments
and what we show is if you actually
spent an extra 1.7 million dollars this
is what Gabi as of the Global Alliance
for a vaccine they're projecting that
they could do more into the future so
they're already vaccinating a lot of
people uh
billion or billion so Billy yeah it is
it's not that cheap yeah but if you did
that you could save an extra half a
million kids dying every year kids a few
uh old people as well right uh from from
the uh Hepatitis B and so on so the the
point here being again you could get 48
dollars back on each dollar spent
beauty of this is again is it's
something we know how to do it's not
rocket science it's very very simple to
do so again I've basically given you an
outline of 12 amazing things and these
are you know I I hope they're sort of
interesting stories and they sort of
give us a a both a perspective of how
far we've come but also how the poorest
part of the world still needs to come
further and you know how to do this for
35 billion dollars in total so it's 41
billion but 6 billion is in consumer
costs so these are the costs of you know
you you don't get to enjoy your tobacco
right that you need to go to a clinic
and actually take a bus ticket but it's
not something we need public resources
for 35 billion dollars and you could get
benefits so you could save 4.2 million
people's lives every year that's across
the 12. that's across the 12. yeah and
you could get benefits and economic
benefits of 1.1 trillion dollars so
that's about one dollar per person per
day in the core part of the world
for 35 billion dollars so again you know
what I would love to see is that we
engage uh you know Global Affairs Canada
that's not what it call anymore a usaid
GIC the Japanese government but also all
governments in the world and all good
people of Will and you know if there's
somebody out there listening who have a
billion dollars you know that's what you
should be spending your money yeah yeah
yeah that's the kind of thing where we
could make an incredible amount of
effort oh sorry an incredible amount of
impact at very low cost well you know
there is obviously
um this hunger
perhaps more particular particularly in
the developed World perhaps because
people now have the luxury of
contemplating such things to be engaged
in some Enterprise that is aimed at some
Transcendent good let's say and like I
see the climate apocalyptic
catastrophizing as a form of religious
striving I think it's
um
unsophisticated and ill-aimed and
contaminated with a fair bit of
malevolence but by the same token I see
the reason that it's attractive to young
people as we mentioned earlier is that
there is some sense that well you should
atone for your privilege we are rich in
the west and some of that's a
consequence of our own uh diligence
driving forward but some of it's a
consequence of being arbitrarily born in
a favorable place and so I think
everyone feels that there's something
morally incumbent upon them to return in
proportion to what they've received and
then that's channeled into a kind of
apocalyptic hysteria and that's
unfortunate and produces Kickback
effects that aren't good though I mean
correct me if you think I'm wrong but I
look at Germany now and I think well
look guys you're you're hyper concerned
about the planet you've reduced that to
carbon you've put in place these
incredibly expensive energy proposals
that have quintupled the cost of energy
roughly speaking
made it much more unreliable made
Germany much more dependent on single
points failure like Russia for
distribution and Supply but worst of all
perhaps also increase the pollution
that's produced by the energy generating
Enterprises rather than made it better
and that just seems like a really bad
strategy right it doesn't even succeed
by the criteria laid down by the people
who are aiming at the outcome then I
look at your
strategy which is very low cost and I
think well here's a place where everyone
could have the opportunity to contribute
in a dozen ways all of which are I think
self-evidently good we could argue about
the details of implementation and you
know you mentioned for example on the
immigration front that there are
political complexities that have to be
taken into account there but mostly your
propositions were well let's make our
immigration policy somewhat more
intelligent which is not that radical a
solution and I can't see why
people couldn't be on board with this if
if
well
and I do think mostly it's ignorance
that stopping it from happening right I
mean we've really only been wrestling
with these large-scale Global problems
conceptually since probably what the
early 1960s it's only 60 years it's not
that surprising we're not that good at
it yet and so I also think it's another
thing I mean fundamentally what is it
that you read about in the papers you
read about stuff that really seems scary
yes and and scary stuff is not that uh
1.5 million people die from tuberculosis
because because they did that for the
last 50 years yeah it doesn't seem like
and oh it's not none I know of you know
so it feels like it's far away and it's
not really it doesn't seem farther away
than climate change well but climate
change has this and and I think climate
changes is one a very very prominent uh
uh sort of uh uh building block of the
same kind of thing it seems like this
could actually hit you and certainly
your children so it's being right and
weather is also local yes it's being
portrayed as something that is
negatively affecting you right here now
and it could become the end of the world
so you know uh and and look that makes
sense if if climate change or something
else really was the end of the world if
it was media hurtling towards Earth that
would destroy us all in 10 years if we
don't do something about it we should do
nothing else than think about that
meteorite because nothing else would
matter I think a lot of people actually
think about climate in that and in that
way and if you do that it kind of makes
sense yes if you accept the apocalyptic
nature it's wrong because that's not
what the U.N climate panel is telling us
it is one of many problems that the
world needs to fix and unfortunately it
turns out that most of the things that
we can do as you pointed out uh you know
in in Germany you end up spending an
enormous amount of money to do a little
bit of good well I would actually argue
certainly on the climate front they have
made it a little bit better but very
little better at very high cost uh and
and and and the air pollution for a
variety of reasons have come down and
almost all rich countries uh just simply
because of Regulation air pollution is
only weakly related uh to uh uh carbon
emissions fundamentally because you know
it's about putting a catalytic converter
on your car it's about making sure oh by
the way that's not one we got right
about not having diesel cars uh we
obviously switched to diesel cars
because we're worried about climate that
turned out to be a very bad deal you
know those kinds of things but
fundamentally I think it's not a it's
not a discussion between people who want
to do stupid things versus people who
want to do good things it's more a
question people who want to do
spectacular things which often end up
being
fairly in effect ineffective that is
they'll do very little good at really
really high cost remember changing the
entire energy system in order to help
people a hundred years from now is not a
terribly effective way of helping
compared to something where you I don't
know give them a jab and then they don't
die or get them get the maternal uh uh
the the pregnant moms uh uh uh uh
slightly uh more encompassing vitamin
pill those kinds of things they they
don't seem as as uh Majestic if you will
yeah but they just happen to be much
much more effective and so again I I I
would love to see if we can't make it
such that the world can start be a
little more sort of I want to do
something that actually is really good
yeah rather than I want to be the guy
who stands up for the the thing that has
the most media attention yeah I was very
I was very curious so we had the sdg uh
uh uh so uh so every year in Denmark uh
people meet with all the politics
at one Island uh and it's a very fun
thing and there's lots of talks and all
kinds of things and you get to see you
know politicians right up close and the
people you typically just see on TV and
stuff it's it's a very good sort of
setup one year it was on the sdgs and
they actually invited me uh which a lot
of people got very annoyed about uh but
you know so they they also had uh uh
these uh 17 so there's 17 cross-cutting
goals for the sdgs and they're like no
hunger no disease you know uh better
employment no climate change that kind
of thing and then people could put in I
think it was Pebbles uh to show what
they wanted
there's like a little bit a little bit a
little bit climate Punk
it was totally over
than ever so and I think you know it's a
niche issue you know I get it you know
if you're rich you're not worried about
tuberculosis you're not worried about
poverty you're not worried about and
then if you really think this is the end
of the world this is the thing that
you're going to focus on I think so the
way I'm I'm looking at this is much more
about saying look I get that there are
all these things that you want to do and
surely climate is not the only thing and
we need to make sure you have sort of an
adequate understanding of how bad it is
it's a problem not the end of the world
but surely we should also do something
about uh you know uh corruption surely
we should also do something about world
peace yeah surely we should do something
about all these things then we also need
to recognize we're not we're doing
really badly on both climate and on
corruption and on world peace and all
these other things so we're fighting
against people's desire to make a
complex situation as simple as possible
yeah so you collapse it to a single
variable and then you have a single
Pathway to moral virtue we're fighting
against the desire the narcissistic
desire for unearned moral virtue on that
front because then you can put yourself
forward as the let's say carbon dioxide
Savior and you've done all the work
we're fighting against the fact that
negative apocalyptic information Garners
disproportionate attention that's a deep
psychological problem because we are
tilted more towards observing negative
information and you're trying to put
forward a positive View and that that
that is a harder thing to to manage uh
you have to tell a very good story in
that case because you don't have that
immediate cachet of the apocalyptic
right and then we're also fighting
against the fact that
to walk through the material that you
have been providing for us for example
today and this has been condensed a lot
and it's taken decades to collapse it
basically took three hours and so that's
you know that's more exposure to issues
of international governance likely that
most people get in their whole life
right well yeah well I know that people
think about political issues an average
of something approximating three minutes
a week right because I mean people like
you and I oh my God so we've just taken
up the whole the whole your whole
lifetime the whole lifetime of political
thought but but sorry guys people do
have a glancing familiarity with such
things partly because they're properly
concerned with the local domain but that
doesn't mean that I don't think that
that means that there's any reason for
despair my sense is and and I think
we've seen that in the collaborative
Ventures that we've undertaken too is
that when you provide people with the
information there is incremental
movement towards appreciating it and so
so so what do you see happening in the
media future you have this book coming
out tell us again what that is so the
book basically make this argument with
all the wonderful graphs and you know
I'm a statistician I think you know
those kinds of graphs where you see how
we used to die a lot and now we die a
lot less but this is mostly for
sub-Saharan Africa and here's how you
can fix it those kinds of things great
stories uh I think you know a lot of
people will like it and it'll make it
much easier to sort of get the idea of
saying this is where I really want to
spend my time and my effort in making
the world a better place uh so that's
called uh best things first you're right
it's coming out mid April the best
things first yes yep uh and and then I
think what will happen is because we're
asking for so little money yeah so 30 25
billion on I can actually Envision so I
don't know if you remember
um uh somebody sort of suggested to Elon
Musk that he could get rid of all a
world hunger for six billion yeah it was
somewhat of a misinterpretation from the
world food program uh and it turned out
there was a lot less he basically said
hey guys if I can eradicate world hunger
for six billion dollars I'm willing to
do it show me how to do it yeah and then
turn it oh we can't quite do that uh and
and you know I I I so I'm not gonna
offer Elon that deal because it's not
available we can't do something that
good but he could you know save uh you
know uh uh you know if he spent 1.1
billion dollars a year on on malaria he
could save 200 000 people every year
right he could do all of these things
and you know he could do any combination
of this and of course Elon Musk is just
sort of the most visible guy we need to
set up a reward program like the Nobel
one for each of these 12 domains where
there's one person a year working on
each of these 12 things who gets who
gets recognized you know because well I
mean these things it's it's it's good to
do good and it's good to reward people
who are doing good that helps to expand
the story and it seems to me that
looking for Cardinal contributors on
each front I mean people are looking
especially people who've been hyper
fortunate they are often seriously
looking for a way to provide
compensation for their disproportionate
Advantage I would say and to provide
people with a pathway to that that was
real I should also just say this this
whole project is funded by The Gates
Foundation uh and I also talked to Gates
himself about this so you know he
clearly does a lot of these things and
he will probably also want to contribute
to this but there are lots of you know
uh very wealthy people but I think it
also it's incumbent in us we spend 175
billion dollars on development Aid and a
lot of this goes to nice things but
honestly not nearly as effective things
as what we're you know some of it goes
to very very effective things we
shouldn't just just dismantled the whole
thing but a lot of it also goes to you
know uh and I've seen this in a lot of
developing countries where you know a
lot of rich people come down and say you
worry about the climate right we'd like
to give you uh a place to you know uh uh
uh we'll uh collect the methane from
your local garbage dump and get you some
energy with that yeah and they're like
yeah that was not quite what we wanted
but if you're going to give it right for
free we'll take it rather than say no
yeah uh but but the sense is this was
not what we would have chosen ourselves
yeah and I I think in some sense we have
a a moral requirement to come out and
say maybe we should make sure we give
the stuff do you think these 12 steps
that you they you they fit into that
category these are these are programs
that the developing countries would be
thrilled to participate in if it was on
the table again I think if you ask any
one politician they would say some of
these 12 and then some really dumb
things right so you know for instance in
India uh uh one one thing that they love
to do politicians is a Pharma loan
waivers so yeah basically they say you
know what you guys loaned a lot of money
I'm gonna waver all of that we're just
gonna pay it off for you uh which is
obviously very popular and Incredibly
bad idea uh partly it's incredibly
costly for the government to pay off
this yeah those loans because you now
know that the government will probably
do it next time you'll take a really bad
bad loans pleasure to punish the people
who actually paid the loans exactly and
and the banks will increasingly not give
loans to smallhold Farmers because they
know that they're going to be forgiven
but the government will be really late
and paying it off so they'll actually
lose a lot of money so they have all
kinds of bad impacts so you know
politicians being politicians and I
understand they they want to get
reelected they'll also be doing some bad
bad proposal but they will also want to
embrace some of these great plans and we
should all as individuals say this is
some of the things so what do you think
what do you think people who are
watching and listening apart from being
more generally informed about the fact
that these options exist and also
hearing a narrative that isn't
it sort of multi-dimensionally
apocalyptic which I think is quite
interesting well you're saying look
here's 12
bins of serious problems these are
serious problems tuberculosis but
they're not apocalyptic I don't know
they're terrible right they're not right
but you know you could you could but if
you were also paranoid you could see
apocalyptic possibilities emerging from
them too like a really decent antibiotic
resistant tuberculosis would be quite
the bloody catastrophe so I mean there
are places where positive feedback loops
could be developing on any of these
fronts so what what I'm pointing out is
that there's many serious problems with
I I would love for people to take uh
take away from from this conversation
that if I want to be a good person these
are some of the 12. I'm you know just
pick one yeah and say you know whenever
people uh uh you know next time say we
should do something about plastic straws
in the ocean or yeah we should do
something about climate change
absolutely but we haven't been doing
very well on these things right I
actually have this really really simple
incredibly effective policy proposal
shouldn't we do that first right right
and you just have those argue the
argument is not to say no to everything
else yes just to say of all the things
we can do shouldn't we do the very most
effective things first yeah and and so
you ask me what's going to happen next
so the UN is going to get together in
September uh and uh and you know sort of
say yay we're halfway on our sustainable
development goals and then in a in a
more a soft voice there I was going to
say and we're not doing very well right
uh and and so if we can get enough
attention to these 12 things and the
fact that this will cost about 35
billion dollars a year I actually think
and and remember it's actually uh as a
ramping up so it's about it it starts at
25 billion dollars and then 50 billion
dollars for for a variety of reasons so
so yeah I actually think we could get
most governments on board for saying
yeah we're gonna promise us remember
we've already promised all this
unrealistic stuff so why not also
promise this and giving up the
incremental cost is low I I think we
could actually get people to say come
September we have badly screwed up all
the promises that we've given the world
maybe we should just do this extra
little push 35 billion dollars and
actually do an amazing amount of good
more good than we've done in a very very
long time at very low cost and we know
this is some of the most effective stuff
we could possibly do in the world I
think the doable doesn't the doable
doesn't I like that that's the financial
times we didn't even think of that but
yeah it's it's a great you know a way of
saying let's do first thing best things
first yeah I can't do my own yeah best
things first yeah well that seems like a
good principle all right Bjorn that was
great man so uh for all of you who've
been watching and listening uh your time
and attention is much appreciated uh
you'll have to take a take keep an eye
out for Bjorn's book best things first
mid April and then you'll have the
arguments at hand in in book form and
that's always helpful
um and thank you to the Daily wire plus
people for facilitating this
conversation to the film crew here in
Calgary El Alberta that's where we
happen to be today Bjorn and I happen to
be in the same neck of the woods so
that's good and we'll uh well we'll
continue our conversations as we move
forward we've got other things cooking
on the International Development front
which I'm going to be talking about very
soon on this YouTube channel or may have
already come out before this does so
well I'm and I'm happy to do anything I
can to facilitate communication about
the doable dozen and best things first
so good to talk to you today man
likewise yeah
I'm actually writing in 35 papers around
the world on all of these topics every
so the financial Post in in Canada uh
but you know the biggest daily in India
and in Indonesia and many other places
in the world and so you know we should
be sharing that every week yes
absolutely we'll do that that's the
short version of each one of these so
800 words uh you get the uh the uh yeah
you said you've been getting a lot of
interest in newspapers in the poorest
half of the world because the they do
see that the 12 proposals they probably
care about these right right right right
right yeah yeah well it's also necessary
for us to do one thing maybe we can
close with this one thing that's really
Disturbed me like truly Disturbed me in
the last year has been this insistence
this apparent neocolonial insistence on
the part of wealthy people in the west
that we just can't afford to have the
developed World strive to attain the
same levels of security and opportunity
that we've reached in the west and first
of all I don't think there's any
empirical evidence for that I don't
think it's I think it's pretty damn weak
claim on the factual front given that if
you make people richer they start caring
about the environment plus their
children like don't die and get to be
educated which seems to be a plus but
it's also it's also morally
reprehensible I do not understand why we
think it's in our proper moral purview
to be saying to people in the bottom
half of the developing world that you
know Well turns out if you industrialize
there's some costs and the environment
Bears some of those costs and well we
just don't think that you should do it
and we're not going to help you do it
and I don't see that as moral in the
least quite contrary it's terrible and
and terrible you're absolutely right
we're doing it again I understand this
from the point of view if you really
believe the end of the world is nigh and
you know global warming is the leading
issue yeah then it may make sense to say
I'm sorry everyone has to just stay poor
and actually I'd like to start that with
yourselves and and that's of course why
this won't work because you can't even
convince your own countries to become
poor and you certainly can't convince
the poor countries to say yeah sure
we'll stay poor uh so it's not going to
happen but partly just simply making it
a little harder for poor countries to
get out of poverty as as in my view
immoral yeah but you know yeah
fundamentally we need to get people to
realize yes climate change is a real
problem but it's not this catastrophic
end of the world this is there's nothing
in the U.N climate panel the new reports
that came out from 2021 2022 uh these
you know 1600 Pages there's no
apocalypse
apocalypse in there yeah there is some
problems that we will face and most of
these problems will be much alleviated
by people not being in poverty right but
you know if a hurricane hits uh if it
hits Florida yeah it costs a lot of
money but it basically don't kill very
many people if it hits in Guatemala the
same hurricane it'll kill lots of people
and shut down the economy that's the
point of being richer yeah not poor that
you're actually much more excited so so
again we need to get people to realize
this is one of many problems and it's
unfortunately one of the places where
you can spend a lot of money and
actually have very little impact whereas
these 12 things you can spend little
money and have an enormous amount of
impact so again my point is not to say
that we shouldn't spend money on all of
these things and make sure that we try
to work make a better world but all the
pet projects you want as long as you do
the things that actually work first
right first yeah all right good hey
thanks you bet man you bet yep yep well
and again thanks for everyone watching
and listening and uh well
that's that guys and
um onward we go
thank you all
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guests on dailywireplus.com